RAVEN TRAVELING

[Told by John Sky of Those-born-at-Skedans] [173]

Over this island [174] salt water extended, they say. Raven flew about.
He looked for a place upon which to sit. After a while he flew away to
sit upon a flat rock which lay toward the south end of the island. All
the supernatural creatures lay on it like Genō′, [175] with their necks
laid across one another. The feebler supernatural beings were stretched
out from it in this, that, and every direction, asleep. It was light
then, and yet dark, they say.

[Told by Job Moody of the Witch People [176]]

The Loon’s place [177] was in the house of Nᴀñkî′lsʟas. One day he went
out and called. Then he came running in and sat down in the place he
always occupied. And an old man was lying down there, but never looking
toward him. By and by he went out a second time, cried, came in, and
sat down. He continued to act in this manner.

One day the person whose back was turned to the fire asked: “Why do you
call so often?” “Ah, chief, I am not calling on my own account. The
supernatural ones tell me that they have no place in which to settle.
That is why I am calling.” And he said: “I will attend to it
(literally, ‘make’).”

[Continued by John Sky]

After having flown about for a while Raven was attracted by the
neighboring clear sky. Then he flew up thither. And running his beak
into it from beneath he drew himself up. A five-row town lay there, and
in the front row the chief’s daughter had just given birth to a child.
In the evening they all slept. He then skinned the child from the foot
and entered [the skin]. He lay down in its place.

On the morrow its grandfather asked for it, and it was given to him. He
washed it, and he put his feet against the baby’s feet and pulled up.
He then put it back. On the next day he did the same thing and handed
it back to its mother. He was now hungry. They had not begun to chew up
food to put into his mouth.

One evening, after they had all gone to bed and were asleep, Raven
raised his head and looked about upon everything inside the house. All
slept in the same position. Then by wriggling continually he loosened
himself from the cradle in which he was fastened and went out. In the
corner of the house lived a Half-rock being, [178] who watched him.
After she had watched for a while he came in, holding something under
his blanket, and, pushing aside the fire which was always kept burning
before his mother, he dug a hole in the cleared place and emptied what
he held into it. As soon as he had kneaded it with the ashes he ate it.
It gave forth a popping sound. He laughed while he ate. She saw all
that from the corner.

Again, when it was evening and they were asleep, he went out. After he
had been gone for a while he again brought in something under his
blanket, put it into the ashes and stirred it up with them. He poked it
out and laughed as he ate it. From the corner of the house the
Half-rock one looked on. He got through, went back, and lay down in the
cradle. On the next morning all the five villages talked about it. He
heard them.

The inhabitants of four of the five towns had each lost one eye. Then
the old woman reported what she had seen. “Behold what that chief’s
daughter’s child does. Watch him. As soon as they sleep he stands up
out of himself.” His grandfather then gave him a marten-skin blanket,
and they put him into the cradle. At his grandfather’s word some one
went out. “Come to sing a song for the chief’s daughter’s baby
outsi-i-ide, outsi-i-ide.” As they sang for him one in the line, which
extended along the entire village front, held him. By and by he let him
fall, and they watched him as he went. Turning around to the right as
he went, he struck the water.

And as he drifted about he cried without ceasing. By and by, wearied
out with crying, he fell asleep. After he had slept a while something
said: “Your mighty grandfather says he wants you to come into his
house.” He turned around quickly and looked out from under his blanket,
but saw nothing. Again, as he floated about, something repeated the
same words. He looked quickly around toward it. He saw nothing. The
next time he looked through the eyehole in his marten-skin. A
pied-billed grebe came out from under the water, saying “Your mighty
grandfather invites you in,” and dived immediately.

He then got up. He was floating against a kelp with two heads. He
stepped upon it. Lo! he stepped upon a house pole of rock having two
heads. He climbed down it. The sea was just as good as the world above.
[179]

He then stood in front of a house. And some one called him in: “Enter,
my son. Word has arrived that you come to borrow something from me.” He
then went in. An old man, white as a sea gull, sat in the rear part of
the house. He sent him for a box that hung in the corner, and, as soon
as he had handed it to him, he successively pulled out five boxes. And
out of the innermost box he handed him two cylindrical objects, one
covered with shining spots, the other black, saying “I am you. That
[also] is you.” He referred to something blue and slim that was walking
around on the screens whose ends point toward each other in the rear of
the house. And he said to him: “Lay this round [speckled] thing in the
water, and after you have laid this black one in the water, bite off a
part of each and spit it upon the rest.”

But when he took them out he placed the black one in the water first
and, biting off part of the speckled stone, spit it upon the rest,
whereupon it bounded off. Because he did differently from the way he
was told it came off. He now went back to the black one, bit a part of
it off and spit it upon the rest, where it stuck. Then he bit off a
part of the pebble with shiny points and spit it upon the rest. It
stuck to it. These were to be trees, they say. [180]

When he put the second one into the water it stretched itself out. And
the supernatural beings at once swam over to it from their places on
the sea. In the same way Mainland [181] was finished and lay quite
round on the water.

He floated first in front of this island (i.e., the Queen Charlotte
islands), they say. And he shouted landward: “Gū′sga wag̣elai′dx̣ᴀn
hā-ō-ō” (Tsimshian words meaning “Come along quickly”) [but he saw
nothing]. Then [he shouted]: “Ha′lᴀ gudᴀñā′ñ łg̣ā′gîñ gwā′-ā-ā” (Haida
equivalent of the preceding). Some one came toward the water. Then he
went toward Mainland. He called to them to hurry, [saying] “Hurry up in
your minds,” but he saw nothing. He spoke in the Tsimshian tongue. Then
one with an old-fashioned cape and a paddle over his shoulder came
seaward. This is how he started it that the Mainland people would be
industrious.

Pushing off again toward this country, he disembarked near the south
end of the island. On a ledge a certain person was walking. Toward the
woods, too, among fallen trees, walked another. Then he knocked him who
was walking along the shore into the water. Yet he floated, face up.
When he again knocked him in the same thing was repeated. He was unable
to drown him. This was because the Ninstints people were going to
practise witchcraft. And he who was walking among the trees had his
face cut by the limbs. He did not wipe it. This was Greatest-crazy-one
(Qōnā′ñ-sg̣ā′na), they say.

He then turned seaward and started for the Heiltsuk coast (ʟdjîñ).
[182] As he walked along he came to a spring salmon that was jumping
about and said to it: “Spring-salmon, strike me over the heart.” Then
it turned toward him. It struck him. Just as he recovered from his
insensibility it went into the sea. Then he built a stone wall close to
the sea and behind it made another. When he told it to do the same
thing again the spring salmon hit him, and, while he was on the ground,
after jumping along for a while, it knocked over the nearer wall. But
while it was yet moving along inside the farther wall he got up, hit it
with a club, killed it, and took it up. [183]

He then called in the crows to help him eat it. They made a fire and
roasted it [on hot stones]. He afterward lay down with his back to the
fire. He told them to wake him when it was cooked. He then overslept.
And they took everything off from the fire and ate. They ate
everything. They then poked some of the salmon between his teeth. And
he awoke after he had slept a while and told them to take the covering
off the roast. And they said to him: “You ate it. After that you went
to sleep.” “No, indeed, you have not taken the coverings off yet.”
“Well, poke a stick between your teeth.” He then poked a stick between
his teeth. He poked out some from his teeth. He thereupon spit into the
crows’ faces and said: “Future people shall not see you flying about
looking as you do now.” They were white, they say, but since that time
they have been black.

And walking away from that place he sat down near the end of a trail.
After he had wept there for a while some people with feathers on their
heads and gambling-stick bags on their backs came to him and asked him
what the matter was. “Oh, my mother and my father are dead. Because
they told me I was born [in the same place] as you I wander about
seeking you.” They then started home with him. Lo, they came to a
house. Then they made him sit down. One of the men went around behind
the screens by the wall passage. After staying away for a while [he
came in and] his legs were wet. He brought a salmon with its back just
broken. They rubbed white stones against each other to make a fire.
Near it they cut the salmon open. They put stones into the fire,
roasted the salmon, and, when it was cooked, made him sit down in the
middle. There they ate it. These were the Beavers, they say. They were
going out to gamble, but turned back on account of him.

One of them again went behind the screens. He brought out a dish of
cranberries, and that, too, they finished. Again he went in. He brought
out the inside parts of a mountain goat, and they divided them into
three portions, and made Raven’s portion big. Then they said to him:
“You had better not go away. Live with us always.” They then put their
gambling-stick bags upon their backs and started off.

When it was near evening they came home. He was sitting in the place
[where they had left him]. Again one went in. He again brought out a
salmon. They steamed it. And they also brought out cranberries. They
also brought out the inside parts of a mountain goat. After they had
eaten they went to bed. On the next day, early in the morning, after
they had eaten three sorts of food, they put the gambling-stick bags
upon their backs and started off again.

He then went behind the screen. Lo, a lake lay there. From it a creek
flowed away in which was a fish trap. The fish trap was so full that it
looked as if some one were shaking it. There were plenty of salmon in
it, and in the lake very many small canoes were passing one another.
Several points were red with cranberries. Lēn [184] and women’s songs
[185] resounded.

Then he pulled out the fish trap, folded it together, and laid it down
at the edge of the lake. He rolled it up with the lake and house, put
them under his arm, and pulled himself up into a tree that stood close
by. They were not heavy for his arm.

He then came down and straightened them out. And he lighted a fire, ran
back quickly, brought out a salmon, and cooked it hurriedly. He ate it
quickly and put the fire out again. Then, sitting beside it, he cried.

As he sat there, without having wiped away his tears, they came in.
“Well, why are you crying?” “I am crying because the fire went out some
time ago.” They then talked to each other, and one of them said to him:
“That is always the way with it.”

They then lighted the fire. One of them brought out a salmon from
behind [the screens] and they cut it across, steamed, and ate it. After
they had finished eating cranberries and the inside parts of a mountain
goat they went to bed. The next morning, very early, after they had
again eaten the three kinds of food, they took their gambling-stick
bags upon their backs and went off.

He at once ran inside. He brought out a salmon, cooked it, and ate it
with cranberries and the inside parts of a mountain goat. He then went
in and pulled up the fish trap. He flattened it together with the
house.

After he had laid them down he rolled the lake up with them and put all
into his armpit. He pulled himself up into a tree standing beside the
lake. Halfway up he sat down.

And after he had sat there for a while some one came. His house and
lake were gone from their accustomed place. After he had looked about
the place for some time he glanced up. Lo, he (Raven) sat there with
their property. Then he went back, and both came toward him. They went
quickly to the tree. They began working upon it with their teeth. When
it began to fall, he (Raven) went to another one. When that, too, began
to fall he sat down with his [burden] on one that stood near it. After
he had gone ahead of them upon many trees in the same way they gave it
up. They then traveled about for a long time, they say. After having
had no place for a long time they found a lake and settled down in it.

Then, after he (Raven) had traveled around inland for a while, he came
to a large open place. He unrolled the lake there. There it lay. He did
not let the fish trap or the house go. He kept them to teach the
Seaward (Mainland) people and the Shoreward (Queen Charlotte islands)
people, they say.

While he was walking along near the edge of the water [he saw] a part
of some creature looking like a woman sticking out of the water at the
mouth of Lalgī′mi. [186] He was fascinated by her, made a canoe, and
went to her. When he got near she went under the water in front of him.
After he had made a canoe of something different he went to her again.
When he got near to her she sank into the water. He made one of
something still different. Again she sank into the water before him.

Now, after he had searched about for a while, he opened a wild pea
(xō′ya ʟū′g̣a, “Raven’s canoe”) with a stick and went out to her in it.
When he came near to get her that time she did not go under the water.
He came alongside of her and took her in. She wore a dancing skirt and
dancing leggings. He then got the canoe ashore, untied her dancing
leggings and dancing skirt, and wiped her all over. He ran to the
woods, got a tcā′łg̣a, [187] and drew it over her for a blanket.

He then launched the canoe and put her in it, and they started
landward. [188] He set her ashore on the west arm of Cumshewa inlet
(G̣a′oqons) and also took out the house for her, but kept the fish trap
in his armpit. He did so because he was going to teach [some one] about
it.

He then went back again. After he had passed along Seaward land (the
mainland) in his canoe for some time, behold, a person came along by
canoe. The hair on the top of his head was gathered in a pointed tuft.
And he (Raven) held his canoe off at arm’s length for a while. The
canoe was full of hair seal. Then he questioned him: “Tell me, where
did you gather the things you have?” “Why, there are plenty of them”
[he replied], and he picked up his hunting spear. After he had looked
between the canoes he speared something. He pulled out a hair seal.
“Look in” [he said], and he (Raven) looked in. He could see nothing. “I
say, I am this way (i.e., have bad eyesight) because a clam spit upon
me. Since then I have been unable to see anything.” He then stretched
his head over. He stretched it to him. And, having pulled a blood clot
out of his eye with his finger nails, he put it back again. He used bad
words to him, therefore he did not take it out for good. Now, he
(Raven) treated him well. He made many advances to him, but he could
not get [what he wanted] and started off.

After he had gone along for some time, lo, Eagle [189] was coming; and
he said to him: “Comrade, I have been drinking sea water. You, too, had
better drink sea water.” And he drank some in his sight. At once he
defecated as he went along. Then Eagle, too, drank some. He also
defecated as he went, and he said: “Cousin, come, let us build a fire.”
“Wait, I am looking for the place.” Then Eagle pulled a water-tight
basket out from under his armpit and drank from it. At once what he had
drunk spurted from his mouth as he went along. After they had gone
along for a while they landed upon certain flat rocks extending into
the sea.

Then Raven went up first and lighted a fire. He again watched Eagle as
he kept taking out his basket and drinking water. He intended to take
it, but he did not have an opportunity. Eagle also let the contents of
his stomach run into the ground, and they went out of sight. Then he
(Raven) took a walk. “I am going to drink,” he said, and passed into
the woods. Having taken roots and put root sap into the hat he wore, he
went to him. While coming back he drank of it on the way. And he asked
Eagle to taste it. He handed it to him. He looked into it. He sniffed
at it. “Tell me, cousin, why does your water smell like pitch?” “Well,
cousin, the water hole was in clay.”

He then broke off tips of branches from a hemlock that had clusters of
twigs sticking out all round them and gave them to him. “Cousin, put
these upon the fire.” And he put them upon the fire. Wā-ā-ā, it burned
brightly. And after he had done this a while, lo, Eagle pulled out his
basket. As soon as he saw that, he (Raven) ran to the end of a clump of
limbs and stepped heavily upon it to break it. “Clump of branches, fall
down, fall down” [he said], and it broke and was coming down. Then he
said to Eagle, “Hukukukuk.” [190] Eagle ran from his water in terror.

Then Raven put on his feather clothing and flew away with it. Eagle,
too, put on his feather clothing and flew after him. He tried to hook
his claws into him, and water was jerked out of [the basket]. As this
happened the salmon streams were formed. Eagle gave up the pursuit, and
he (Raven) continued scattering water out of his mouth. After a while
he emptied the last where he had stretched out the first [lake]. He
treated this island in the same manner. After that he emptied [the
last] at the head of Skeena. [191]

Eagle was also called Lā′g̣ałᴀm. [192]

Raven finished this. He then traveled northward. After he had traveled
for a while he came to where a village lay. He then put himself in the
form of a conifer needle into a water hole behind the chief’s house and
floated about there awaiting the chief’s daughter.

The chief’s child then went thither for water, and he floated in the
water that she dipped up. She threw this out and dipped a second time,
but he was still there. And when close to her he said: “Drink it.”

Not a long time after that she became pregnant. Then she gave birth [to
a child], and its grandfather washed the child all over and put his
feet to its feet. It began to creep about. After it had crept about for
a while it cried so violently that no one could stop it. “Boo hoo,
moon,” it kept saying. After it had tired them out with its crying they
stopped up the smoke hole, and, having pulled one box out of another
four times, they gave it a round thing. There came light throughout the
house. After it had played with this for a while it let it go and again
started to cry. “Boo hoo, smoke hole,” it cried. They then opened the
smoke hole, and it cried again and said: “Boo hoo, more.” And they made
the space larger. Then he flew away with it. Marten [193] pursued him
below. Tā′ʟᴀtg̣ā′dᴀla, [194] too, chased him above. They gave it up and
returned.

He then put the moon into his armpit. And, after he had traveled about
for a while, he came to where Sea-gull and Cormorant sat. He made them
quarrel with each other. And he said to Cormorant: “People tell me to
brace myself on the ground with my tongue this way [when fighting].” He
then did it, and [Raven] went quickly to him. He bit off his tongue.

Then he made it into an eulachon. And he put on his cape and rubbed
this all over it, and he rubbed it on the inside of the canoe as well.
Then he also put rocks in and went in front of Qadadjâ′n. [195] And he
entered his house. “Hī, I, too, have become cold.” Qadadjâ′n was lying
with his back to the fire and, looking toward him, saw his canoe,
covered with slime, lying on the water as if full. He then became angry
and pulled the screen down toward the fire. Eulachon immediately poured
forth. He then threw the stones out of the canoe and put them into it.
When it was full, he went off with them.

After he had distributed the eulachon along the mainland in the places
where they now are and had put some in Nass inlet, he left a few in the
canoe.

He then placed ten paddles under these, of which the bottom one had a
knot hole running through it. And he shouted landward to where a
certain person lived. She then brought out a basket [196] on her back,
and he said to her: “Help yourself, chieftainess.” After she had put
them into [the basket] a while, and her basket was nearly full, he
stepped upon a stalk of łqeā′ma [197] which he had provided and said:
“Ā-ā-ā, I feel my canoe cracking.” He then pushed it from the land, and
when she stretched out her arm for more [eulachon] he pulled out the
hairs under her armpit.

Fern-woman (Snᴀndjā′ñ-djat) at once called for her sons. Both her sons
knew how to throw objects by means of a stick, they say. [198] He
immediately fled. And one of them shot at him and broke his paddle. And
after they had broken ten he paddled with the one that had a knot hole.
When they shot after him again he said “Through the knot hole,” and
through the knot hole went the stone. Thus he was saved. He had
dexterously got her armpit hair.

He then left the canoe. He came to a shore opposite some people who
were fishing with fish rakes in Nass. And he said: “Hallo, throw one
over to me. I will give you light.” But they said: “Hᴀ hā′-ā-ā, he who
is speaking is the one who is always playing tricks.” He then let a
small part shine and put it away again. They forthwith emptied their
canoe in front of him several times.

He then called a dog and said to it: “Shall I make (or ordain) four
moons?” The dog said that would not do. The dog wanted six. He (Raven)
then said to him: “What will you do when it is spring?” “When I am
hungry I will move my feet in front of my face.” And he made it as he
(the dog) told him to do, they say.

He then bit off a part of the moon. After he had chewed it for a while
he threw it up [into the sky]. “Future people are going to see you
there in fragments forever.” He then broke the moon into halves by
throwing it down hard and threw [half of] it up hard into the air, the
sun as well.

Thence he traveled northward. The smoke of House-point was near him. He
then pulled off his hair ribbon and threw one end of it over here. He
at once ran across on it. And he walked about the town, peering in
[through the cracks]. The wife of the town chief of House-point had
given birth to a child. And he waited until evening. Then, at the time
when they went to bed, he entered [the child’s] skin and himself became
newly born.

Every morning they washed him, and his father held him on his knee.
After a while his aunt came down to the fire. They handed him to his
aunt. After she had held him for a while he pinched her teats.
“Ha′oia,” she said. “Why do you say that, ʟ̣a?” [199] “Why, he nearly
fell from me.” The town chief was named “Hole-in-his-fin,” and his
nephew was named “Fin-turned-back.”

After a while he thought: “I wish the village children would go
picnicking.” And on the next day the children of the town went
picnicking. They brought along all sorts of good food. And his aunt
brought him to the same place. When they had played for a while they
went away. After they had all gone his aunt sat there alone. He looked
about, entered his own skin quickly, and seized his aunt. And his aunt
said: “Do not take hold of me. I am single because your father is going
to eat my gifts.” [200]

Then, as soon as she started off, he became a baby again. His aunt was
crying and as she went had it on her mind to tell what had happened. He
wished his aunt would forget it when she went in. And she went in.
After her brother had looked at her a while he asked: “What is the
cause of those tear marks?” “Why, I discovered him eating sand. That is
why I am crying.”

He then started along by the sea and, having punched holes in the
shells brought up by the tide, he made two dancing rattles. And he ran
toward the woods. He took grave mats, frayed out the ends, and fastened
shells upon these. He made them into a dancing skirt. And he said to
the ghost: “Are you awake?” It got up for him, and he tied the dancing
skirt upon it. He also put the rattle into its hand. And he said to it:
“Walk in front of the town. When you reach the middle wave the rattle
in front of you toward the houses. A deep sleep will fall then upon
them.”

Now it began to dance, they say. When it waved the rattle toward the
town, just as he had told it to do, they began to mumble in their
sleep. They had nightmares. He then went into the first house and,
roughly pulling out a good-looking woman, lay there with her. And he
entered the next one. There, too, he lay with somebody. As he went
along doing this he entered his father’s house, went to where his aunt
slept, and lay with her.

And a certain old woman living in the house corner did not have a
nightmare. She had been observing the chief’s son in the cradle come
out of himself. Then he went out again. After he had been away for a
while he came in and lay down to sleep in the cradle. He made the ghost
lie down again.

The town people told one another in whispers that he had lain with his
aunt, and his mother, Flood-tide-woman, as well. This went on for a
while; then, all at once, there was an outbreak. Then they drove
Flood-tide-woman away with abusive language. Her boy, too, they drove
off with her with abusive words. She was the sister of Great-breakers,
[201] belonging to the Strait people, they say.

And they came along in this direction (i.e., toward Skidegate). After
they had come along for a while they found a young sea otter opposite
the trail that runs across Rose Spit (G̣o′łgustᴀ). His mother then
skinned it and sewed it together. Now she stretched it and, having
scraped it, laid it out to dry. When it was dried she made it into a
blanket for her son. He was Nᴀñkî′lsʟ̣as-łiña′-i, [202] they say.

And after they had traveled for a while she stood with her child in
front of her brother’s house. By and by somebody put his head out. “Ah,
Flood-tide-woman stands without.” “N-n-n, she has done as she always
does (i.e., been unfaithful to her husband), and for that reason comes
back again,” said her brother. And again he spoke: “With her is a boy.
Come, come, come, let her in.”

Then she came in with her son. And her brother’s wife gave them
something to eat. By and by he asked of her: “Flood-tide-woman, what
are you going to name the child?” And she moved her hand over the back
of her head. She scratched it [in embarrassment]. “Why, I am going to
name your nephew Nᴀñkî′lsʟas-łiña′-i.” As she spoke she held back her
words hesitatingly. “I tell you, name him differently, lest the
supernatural beings who are afraid to think of him (the bearer of that
name) hear that a common child is so called.”

While she was staying with her brother her child walked about. He
banged the swinging door roughly. “Flood-tide-woman, stop that child
from continually opening the door in that way.” “Why, chief, I never
can stop him.” “Just hear what she says. What a common child is
continually doing the supernatural beings ever fear to do.” On another
day, while Great-breakers was lying down, he banged the door again. He
said to the mother: “Flood-tide-woman, a common child is doing the same
thing again. Try to stop him.” “Why, chief, I can never stop your slave
nephew.”

And where he was sitting with his mother by the fire, on the side
toward the door, right there he defecated. And his uncle’s wife made a
pooping sound at him. “I shall indeed go with that husband’s nephew,”
he heard his uncle’s wife say. [203]

On the next day, very, very early in the morning, he started off. After
he had gone along for some time he came to some persons who burst into
singing sweet songs and danced. They then asked him: “Tell us, what are
you doing hereabout?” “I am gathering woman’s medicine.” “Well, what do
you call woman’s medicine? Is woman’s medicine each other’s medicine?”
“Yes; it is each other’s medicine.” Those women chewed gum as they
sang. Then one of these gave him a piece. “This is woman’s medicine.”
And one of them gave him directions: “Now, when you enter the house,
pass round to the right. Chew the gum as you go in. And when your
uncle’s wife asks it of you, by no means give it to her. Ask of her the
thing her husband owns. When it is in your hands give the gum to her.”
And he went away from the singers. When he entered the gum stuck out
red from his mouth. Then his uncle’s wife said to him: “I say,
Nᴀñkî′lsʟas-łîña′-i, come, give me the gum.” He paid no attention to
her. He then sat down beside his mother, and to his mother he said:
“Tell her to give me the thing my uncle owns. I will then give her the
gum.” Then his mother went to her. She told it her. And to her she gave
something white and round. He then handed her the gum. While his
uncle’s wife chewed it and swallowed the juice he saw that her mind was
changed.

Some time after that his fathers [204] went by on the sea. And he said
to a dog sitting near the door: “Nᴀñki′lsʟas-łîña′-i says he desires
the place where his fathers now are to dry up and leave them.” And
immediately it went out and said so. The tide left them high and dry,
and they were in great numbers. They made a scraping sound in their
efforts to move. He then said to his mother: “I say, go and pour water
upon my fathers.” She then went down to them, and she did not look upon
her husband. She poured it only upon Fin-turned-back. And he went to
his mother and told her to pour water upon his father. She acted as if
she did not hear his voice. They were going to the supernatural beings
of Da′osgên [205] to buy a whale, they say.

Then he came in and said to the dog again: “Go and say,
‘Nᴀñkî′lsʟas-łîña′-i says he desires the tide to come in to his
parents.’” He then went out quickly and said it. X̣ū-ū-ū-ū-ū (noise of
the waves coming in), and they at once were moving along far off on the
water.

And, after they had been gone a while, they returned to that place. And
again he said to the dog: “Go and say, ‘Nᴀñkî′lsʟas-łîña′-i says he
wishes his parents to leave something for him.’” He then went out
quickly and said so. Something black was sent to one end of the town.
He went thither. A whale floated there.

After he had made a house of hemlock boughs he shot all kinds of birds
there. By and by a bufflehead came and ate of the whale. He then wanted
it. And he aimed just above the top of its head. When it flew it struck
its head. He then skinned it and entered [the skin]. And he wished for
a heavy swell, and it became rough, and he walked toward the water. And
when a wave came toward him he quickly dived under it. After he had
done the same thing repeatedly he flopped up from the water, took the
skin off, and dried it in his branch house. He thus came to own it,
they say. He kept it in the fork of a tree.

After he had shot there all kinds of birds something blue and slender
came and ate of it. It flew down from above. It ate sitting upon it. He
then shot it. He shot [only] through its wings. He (Raven) was sad. And
on the next day, early in the morning, he entered his branch house.
After he had sat there for a while it again came down from above,
making a noise as it came. And after it stood upon it and had begun to
eat he shot it. The arrow again passed quickly through its wings. His
mind was sad.

And on the next day, very early in the morning, he again went into the
branch house. It came by and by and ate. And he now shot over it. As it
started to fly it was struck in the head. He then went down to get it.
He brought it into the branch house.

When he had skinned it, he entered it. He then flew up. After he had
flown for a while he turned quickly and came down. He then ran his beak
into a rocky point at the end of the town. At the same time he cried
out: “G̣ao” (Raven’s croak). Though the rock was strong, he split it by
his voice. After he had dried it in the branch house he put it where he
kept the bufflehead.

He then started off, they say. He went in and sat down by the side of
his mother. By and by his aunt said to her husband: “Why do you remain
seated so long? Go and hunt,” she said to him. And they brought out a
war spear and a box of arrows, and they put pitch on [the cord wound
round the arrow point] for him. And at midnight he went off in a canoe,
and his place was vacant in the morning.

He (Raven) then went out and stood up out of himself (i.e., changed
himself). He put on two sky blankets and painted his face. And, as soon
as he entered, his uncle’s wife turned her head. He went around behind
the screens. And, after some time had passed, it thundered on the
underground side of the island.

And her husband came back and asked his wife: “My child’s mother, what
noise was that, sounding like the one that is heard when I go to bed
with you?” And she laughed and said: “Why, I guess I am the same with
Nᴀñkî′lsʟas-łîña′-i, your nephew.”

On the next day, early in the morning, Great-breakers sat in the place
where the fire was. On the top of the chief’s hat (dadjî′ñ skîl) that
he wore a round fleck of foam swirled rapidly. Nᴀñkî′lsʟas-łîña′-i
began to look around. And he went out, got his two skins, put on his
two sky blankets, and came in. His uncle had his hair tied in two
braids. Something on his head began turning around very rapidly.

Then a strong current of sea water poured from the corner of the house.
And he put his mother in his armpit, quickly entered his bufflehead
skin, and swam about in the current. He dived many times and again swam
about. And when the sea water came up to the roof of the house he
floated out with it through the smoke hole.

He then quickly entered the raven’s skin. He at once flew up. He then
ran his beak into the sky. And his tail was afloat on the water. Then
he kicked against the water. “Enough. You, too, belong to me.” There it
stopped (lit., “came to a point”). It began to melt downward.

And he looked down. The smoke of his uncle’s house looked pleasing. He
then became angry with him, at the sight, and started to fly down.
After he had flown for a while he ran his beak into it from above,
crying as he did so, “G̣ao.” “Oh, you shall own the title of
Chief-of-chiefs (Kî′lsʟekun)” [said his uncle].

He then became what he had been before. He entered with his mother.
From that time he often set out to hunt birds. When he came in one day
he said to his mother: “Mother, Qî′ñgi [206] says he is coming to adopt
me.” And his uncle said to her: “Qꜝā′la īdjā′xᴀn, [207]
Flood-tide-woman, stop that child from talking. We are, indeed, fit to
be adopted.”

After this had happened many times they saw something wonderful, they
say. People came dancing on ten canoes. He then went out, put on two
sky blankets, and walked around on the retaining planks. Said his
uncle: “What he brought on by his talking has happened. I wonder how we
are going to supply people and food.”

And, after he had walked about for a while, he kicked upon the ground
in the front part of the house on the right side. There the ground
cracked open. Out of it one threw up a drum from his shoulder. They
came pouring out. He went to the other side as well. There he also
kicked. “Earth, even, become people” [he said]. Thence, too, one threw
up a drum from his shoulder. And he did the same thing to the ground in
one of the rear corners. Out of that, too, some one threw up a drum
from his shoulder. He did as before on the other side. And they danced
in four lines toward the beach. Out of his uncle’s house Tsimshian,
Haida, Kwakiutl, Tlingit [came] singing different songs. [208] Yet his
uncle said [sarcastically]: “We shall indeed have lots to eat.” They
sat down in lines, and around the door was a crowd to serve the food.

Then Nᴀñkî′lsʟas-łîña′-i said: “Now go to my sister Sî′ndjugwañ to get
food for me.” [209] And a crowd of young men went to get it. They came
back with silver salmon and cranberries. And [he said]: “Go to
Yał-kīñā′ñg̣o, [210] too, to beg some for me.” Her house was also full
of silver salmon, cranberries, and sockeye salmon. They also brought
some from the woman at the head of Skidegate creek, [211] and they
brought some from the woman at the head of Qꜝā′dᴀsg̣o creek. It mounted
up level with the roof. The distribution of food was still going on
when daylight came. On the next day, too, and on the next day [it went
on]. At the end of ten days they went off in a crowd. These [days] were
ten winters, they say.

And he went off with his father Qî′ñgi. Soon after they arrived at his
village he invited the people to come. He called them for a feast. He
(Nᴀñkî′lsʟas) did not eat the smallest bit. And on the next day he
called them in to a feast for his son. Again he did not eat. Two
big-bellied fellows had come in. People took up cranberries by the box,
and when one of these opened his mouth they emptied a boxful into it.
They also emptied boxes into the mouth of the other.

On the next day his father invited them again, and they (the
big-bellies) came in and stood there. And again cranberries were
emptied into their mouths. Then Nᴀñkî′lsʟas went quickly toward the end
of the town. As he was going along he came to open ground where
cranberries were being blown out. He stopped up this hole with moss,
and he did the same to another. After he had entered he questioned the
big-bellied ones, who stood near the door: “I say, tell me the reason
why you eat [so much].” “Don’t ask it, chief. We are always afflicted
in this way.” “Yes; tell me. When my father calls in the people, and
you are going to eat, if you do not tell me I will make you always
full.” “Well, chief, sit close to me while I tell you. Early in the
morning take a bath, and when you lie down [after it] scratch yourself
over your heart, and when scabs have formed on the next day swallow
them.”

He did at once as he was told. After he had sat still for a while [he
said]: “Father, I have become hungry.” Upon this his father sent to
call the people. [The big-bellied persons] again came in and stood
there. Again was [food] emptied into their mouths. It did them no good.
And he again became hungry. He again called them in. Day after day, for
many days, he called them in. One day he went out [to defecate]. They
saw him eating the cranberries that had floated ashore upon the beach
[from peoples’ dung]. Thereupon they shut the door upon him.

He now started off. By and by he came [back] and sat behind his
father’s house. “Father, please let me in.” They did not want him.
“Father, please let me in. I will put grizzly bears upon you. I will
put mountain goats upon you.” [212] He offered him all the mainland
animals. “No, chief, my son, they might wake me up by walking over me.”

He then began to sing a certain song. He beat time by striking his head
against the house. The house began to fall over. And at that time he
nearly let him in, they say. And when he went away they snatched off
from him the black bear and marten [skins] he wore.

That time he went away for a long period. By and by they saw him
floating on the sea in front of the town in a hair-seal canoe. [213] He
wore his uncle’s hat. On top of it the foam was swirling around as he
floated. As soon as they saw he had become changed in some unknown
manner the town people all entered Qîñgi’s house. And after they had
talked over what they should do for a while he dressed himself up. The
town people put themselves between the joints of his tall hat. After
Nᴀñkî′lsʟas had remained there a while the sea water continued to
increase. And Qîñgi, too, grew up. Then he became angry and broke the
hat by pulling it downward. Half the people of his town were lost.

After he had been gone for a while he came and stopped in front of the
town. “Nᴀñkî′lsʟas is in front on a canoe.” And his father said: “Go
and get him that I may see his face.” They then spread out mats, and
his comrades came in and sat there. His father continually gave him
food. His father was glad to see him.

After food had been given out for a long time and evening was come, his
father sat down near the door. By and by he said: “My son, chief’s
child, let one of your companions tell me a story.” He then asked the
one who sat next to him: “Don’t you know a story?” [214] “No,” they all
said, and he turned in the other direction also. “Don’t you know one
story?” “No; we do not.” He then said to his father: “They do not know
any stories.” And his father, Qîñgi, said, “Ītꜝē′i, let one of your
companions relate to me ‘Raven traveling,’” by which he made
Nᴀñkî′lsʟas so ashamed that he hung his head.

By and by, lo, a small, dark person, who sat on the right side, threw
himself backward where he sat. “Ya-yā′-ō-ō-ō-ō-ō, the village of the
master of stories, Qîñgi.” When he said this the people in the house
were [startled], as if something were thrown down violently.
“Ya-yā′-ō-ō-ō-ō-ō, the supernatural beings came to look at a
ten-jointed łqeā′ma [215] growing in front of the village of the master
of stories, Qîñgi. There they were destroyed.” “Ya-yā′-ō-ō-ō-ō-ō, the
supernatural beings came and looked at a rainbow [216] (a story name)
moving up and down in front of the village of the master of stories,
Qîñgi. There they were destroyed [said the next].” “Ya-yā′-ō-ō-ō-ō-ō,
the supernatural beings once came to look at Greatest-sea-gull and
Greatest-white-crested-cormorant throw a whale’s tail back and forth on
a reef that first came up in front of Qîñgi’s town. There they were
destroyed.” “Ya-yā′-ō-ō-ō-ō-ō, the supernatural beings came to see
Harlequin-duck and Blue-jay run a race with each other on the property
of the master of stories, Qîñgi. There they were destroyed.”
“Ya-yā′-ō-ō-ō-ō-ō, the supernatural beings once came to look at the
lower section of a wooden rattle lying around which used to sing of
itself. [217] There they were lost.” “Ya-yā′-ō-ō-ō-ō-ō, the
supernatural beings once came to look at an inlet, which broke suddenly
through white rocks at the end of Qîñgi’s town, out of which Djila′qons
came knitting. There they were destroyed.” “Ya-yā′-ō-ō-ō-ō-ō, the
supernatural beings once came to see Tā′dᴀlᴀt-g̣ā′dᴀla and Marten run a
race with each other in front of the village of the master of stories,
Qîñgi. There they were destroyed.” [What the other three said has been
forgotten. [218]]

Then Nᴀñkî′lsʟas started off afoot. After he had traveled for a while
he came to the town of Ku′ndji. In front of it many canoes floated.
They were fishing for flounders. [219] They used for bait salmon roe
that had been put up in boxes. He then desired some, and changed
himself into a flounder. And he went out. After he had been stealing
the salmon roe for a while they pulled out his beak.

Those people, who then sat gambling in rows in the town, looked at the
beak one after another. They handed it back and forth for the purpose.
Nᴀñkî′lsʟas looked at it, and said: “It is made of salmon roe.” He then
went toward the woods and called Screech-owl. And he pulled its beak
out, put it upon himself, and put some common thing into [the owl] in
its stead.

By and by they went out again to fish and again he went out. And after
he had jerked off many pieces of salmon roe a hook entered one of his
lips. They then pulled him to the surface and came ashore, and [the
owner] gave it to his child, and they ran a stick through it [to put it
over the fire]. And when his back became too warm he thought: “I wish
something would make them run over toward the end of the town.” After
some time had passed the whole town (i.e., the people of the town)
suddenly moved. And right before the child, who sat alone near by, he
put on his feather clothing and flew out through the smoke hole. The
child then called to its mother: “My food flew away, mother.”

He did not go away from the town, they say. On another day they
prepared some food in the morning. Crow invited the people to a feast
of cakes made of the inner bark of the hemlock and cranberries mixed
together. Among them they called him (Raven). And he refused. “No; you
only call each other for mussels.” Afterward he sent Eagle out to see
what they did call each other for. And after he had gone thither he
said to him: “They call each other for cakes of hemlock bark and
cranberries.” “Now, cousin, be my messenger.” Eagle then said: “The
chief is coming.” “No; we call each other for mussels.”

Before they had begun eating he ran into the woods. After he had made
rotten trees into ten canoes he put in spruce cones, standing them up
along the middle. Grass tops he put into their hands for spears. They
then came around the point, and he walked near them with his blanket
wrapped tightly around him. Terrible to behold, they came around the
point, men standing in lines along the middle of the canoes. Leaving
their food, the people fled at once. He then went into the house and
ate the cakes. He ate. He ate. Where the canoes landed they were washed
about by the waves.

He then started off. He traveled about. On the way he got his sister
neatly, they say. He then left his sister with his wife. And he started
off by canoe. He begged Snowbird [220] to go along with him, and took
him for company. He also took along a spear. And short objects [221]
lay one upon another on a certain reef. Then, when they came near to
it, the bird became different. [222] He took him back. And he begged
Blue-jay also to go, and he started with him. But when they got near
he, too, flapped his wings helplessly in the canoe. And, after he had
tried all creatures in vain, he made a drawing on a toadstool with a
stick, placed it in the stern, and said to it: “Bestir yourself and
reverse the stroke” [to stop the canoe]. He then started off with him.
But when he got near it shook its head [so strong was the influence].

He then speared a big one and a small one and took them back. And when
he came home he called his wife and placed the thing he had gone for
upon her. And he put one upon his sister as well. Then Sīwa′s (his
sister) cried, and he said to her: “But yours will be safe.” [223]

After he left that place he married Cloud-woman. And, as Cloud-woman
had predicted, a multitude of salmon came up for him. But, when they
were on the point of moving and he went through the middle passage of
the smokehouse, salmon bones stuck in his hair, and he used bad
language that made his wife angry. [224] She then said to the dog
salmon: “Swim away.” From all the places where they lay they began to
swim off. And a box of salmon roe on which his sister sat was the only
food left in the house.

They then moved the camp empty-handed. And he made himself sick. He
went along in the bow beside the salmon roe. After he had gone along
for a while his sister smelt something, and he said it was a scab he
had pulled off with his finger nails. After she had spoken about it
many times as they went along he threw Sīwa′s’s box empty ashore.

And after they had gone along for a while they built a camp fire. He
then put yellow cedar upon the fire. After it had given forth sparks
for a while one flew between Sīwa′s’s legs. He then told her a remedy:
“Now, go around in the woods exclaiming, ‘I call for medicine.’ When
something says ‘Yes,’ go over to it and sit down where a short red
thing sticks up.” And after he had spoken to her, and she had called
about for a while, something said “Yes.” And after she had looked for
it [she saw] something red sticking up. Then she sat down there. Lo,
she discovered her brother lying on the ground under her.

He then became ashamed, and drew something with the tip of his finger.
Right there a child cried. And he took it out [of the ground]. And he
put boards round it as people were going to do in the future. Then the
child became old enough to play. And he went around after [the child].
One time when it went out to play it vanished forever.

Then he started to search for it. He put on his feather clothing and
flew over the whole of this country. He did the same upon Mainland.
When he could by no means find it, he heard that the supernatural
beings had taken it because he (Raven) used to fool them. He then
stopped searching. When the boy stood up, lightning used to flash
around his knee-joints. He was named Sᴀqaiyū′ł.

One day some one with disheveled hair came in. “Father, I come in to
you.” Then he (Raven) spat upon his face. “Sᴀqaiyū′ł was not like
that.” And when he went out, lightning played around his knee-joints.
He vanished at once. Then he cried; he cried.

Then he put his sister into his armpit and started off with her. And
after Siwa′s had finished her planting at Ramsey island he came, stood
on the inner side of Ramsey island, and begged all kinds of birds to
accompany him. They went after cedar-bark roofing in preparation for a
potlatch. They soon got this out upon the open ground. He then caused
the cedar bark to be left there. [225]

And, when they became hungry, he called all kinds of animals. And,
after they came floating in front of him on their canoes, he came out
wearing black, shabby clothing. He then spoke. They did not understand.
And they sent for Porpoise-woman. And when she came he (Raven) said: “I
am the sides and I am the ends, between which I qᴀlaastī′s.” [226] Then
she said: “How would they get along if I were absent? He wants them to
fight him with abalones and sea eggs.” They then threw these at him.
And he ate. And, since the house was too small, he started to potlatch
outside. All the supernatural beings whom he had invited came by canoe.

Then he made holes in the beaks of all kinds of birds. And Eagle, too,
asked to have his pierced. He became wearied by his importunities and
made them anyhow. That is why his nasal openings now run upward.

[Told by Abraham of the Qꜝā′dᴀsg̣o qē′g̣awa-i]

When he first started he decked out the birds. They were made of
different varieties, as they now appear to us, in one house. Then, as
soon as he had dressed up the birds, they went out together. At that
time he refused to adorn two of them. When the house was too full they
said to those who sat next to the walls: “Let your heads be as thin as
the place where you sit.” Those have thin heads.

The two he had refused to adorn went crying to the [various]
supernatural beings and came to Rose Spit, where they heard a drum
sound toward the woods. They went thither. When they came and stood
before Master Carpenter [227] with tear marks on their faces, he asked:
“What causes your tear marks?” They then answered: “Raven [228] decked
out the other birds. He said we were not worth adorning.” “And yet you
are going to be handsomer than all others” [he said], and, having let
them in, he painted them up. He put designs on their skins (feathers).
Those were the Qꜝē′da-kꜝō′­xawa. [229]

[Continued by John Sky]

He went thence by canoe, and came to where herring had been spawning.
He then filled the canoe with herring, dipped them out of the place
where the bilge water settles and threw them toward the shore. “Future
people will not see the place where you are.” [230]

[Continued by the chief of Kloo of Those-born-at-Skedans]

And when he went away he came to where a spider crab sat. And he said
to it: “Comrade, do you sit here? Don’t you know that we used to play
together as children?” He then put his wings into its mouth and took
them out again. “A little farther off, spider crab,” he said to it, and
it closed its jaws together. It began at once to move seaward. And he
(Raven) said to it: “Comrade, let me go. When about to let me go you
used to look at me with eyes partly closed [as you are doing] now. Let
me go. It will be better for us to play with each other differently.
Let me go.” By and by the sea water flowed over him. Then it let him
go.

And after he had traveled for a while he pulled off leaves from the
salal-berry bushes, stuck spruce needles into them, and came to where
an old man lay with his back to the fire. And he entered and sat down
on the side opposite him. “Hē,” he said, as if he, too, were cold from
going after something. Then the old man looked over to him and said:
“Have I stretched out my legs, that one keeps saying he is getting
cold?” He then stretched out his legs, and it became low tide. And,
with Eagle, he brought up sea eggs to the woods. [Raven also brought up
a red cod, but Eagle brought up a black cod.]

They then made a camp fire. And Eagle roasted his. [231] It began to
drop fat into the fire. Then Raven roasted his, but it became dry. And
he asked to taste of Eagle’s. “Cousin, why does yours taste like cedar?
Cousin, I will bring you a small bundle of bark from the woods. When a
stump comes to you, rub this [black cod] upon its face.” As soon as he
went off Eagle put some stones into the fire. When they became red-hot,
the stump came toward him. He then picked up a stone with the tongs and
rubbed it upon the stump, and the stump went back into the woods out of
sight. By and by, lo, he came to him with bark on his shoulder. His
face was blackened all over. “Why, cousin, what has happened to your
face?” “Well, cousin, I pulled some bark down upon my face.” “Why,
cousin, it is as if something had burned it.” “No, indeed, cousin, bark
dropped upon me.”

[Continued by John Sky]

On the way from this place he begged for canoe companions. [232] He
begged all kinds of birds to come. Then Blue-jay offered himself to
him, and he said: “No: you are too old to come.” But he insisted. He
then seized him by the top of his head and pulled him into the canoe.
For that reason the top of his head is flattish. And he completed his
begging for comrades.

They all got then into the canoe. And it set off. It went. It went. It
went. It went. They stopped in front of the Halibut people.
Hu-hu-hu-hu-hu, [233] they came down to the beach in crowds. “Raven is
going to war,” they said one to another as they came down to meet him.
And he asked them to go, too, as companions, and they went. They fixed
themselves along the bottom of the canoe like skids [234] and started.
They went. They went. And before daylight they landed at the end of his
(the enemy’s) town. Then his Halibut people lay [in two rows], with
their heads outward, along the path which extended down from the house.
Outside of them the birds also stood in lines. They hid themselves
behind the halibut. After they had been there a while he came out
wearing his dancing hat. When he came out one of the halibut flopped
his tail at him. He fell down. The next one, too, wriggled his tail. So
they continued to do until they brought him in. [235] Then he asked
them why they did this to him. And they said they did it because he
blew too long. They then let him go. And they started back. This was
Southeast-wind, they say. After they had gone along for a while they
set down the halibut at their homes, and the birds also went away.

And after he had traveled about for a while he came to some children
playing and offered to join them. “I say-y-y, playing children, let me
play with you-ou-ou.” “No-o-o; you would eat all of our hair
se-e-e-al.” And he said: “My grandfather has gone after some for me. My
father has gone after some for me.” They then let him play with them.
Then he devoured all of the children’s hair seals, and they were all
crying for them.

He also started away from that place. After he had gone along for a
while he found a flicker’s feather floating near the shore and said to
it: “Become a flicker.” It at once flapped its wings.

And after he had traveled thence for a while he came to the place where
Master Fisherman [236] and his wife lived. He wanted Raven’s flicker;
so he gave it to him. “Things like this are found on an island that I
own.” And he said he would show it to him. And after he said he would
show it to him Master Fisherman baited a halibut hook taken from among
those hanging in bunches on the wall. When he had let it down into the
hole into which they used to vomit sea water he pulled out a halibut,
and his wife split it open and steamed it. When it was cooked the three
ate it.

They went to bed, and next day he took him (Master Fisherman) to see
the flicker island. Then he arrived there and said to Master Fisherman:
“Do not get off.” Then he (Raven) landed. He broke off the ends of
cedar limbs. And he wounded his nose. As he went along he let the blood
run down into his hands. And he threw around the cedar twigs with blood
upon them. “Change to flickers,” he repeated. Then they flew in a
flock. And he brought some in. “Now, get off. There are plenty of
them,” he said to him. Then he landed.

[Continued by the Chief of Kloo.]

And he (Raven) lay down in the canoe and began to drift away with the
wind, and he (Master Fisherman) shouted to him: “Say, you are drifting
away. You are drifting away.” He paid no attention to him. [237] He got
far off. Then he started away [by paddling]. Then he made himself
appear like Master Fisherman, and landed in front of his wife’s
[house]. And he said: “Behold, it was the one always doing such things.
There is not a sign of the things he went to show me.” And after he had
had her as his wife a while he said: “My child’s mother, differently
from my former state, I am hungry.” Then she steamed a fat halibut for
him, and he ate it. After he had remained sitting for a while, he said:
“My child’s mother, differently from my former state, I would like it.”
[238] Then he again drank salt water. And after he had drunk salt water
he baited the halibut hook and let it down into the hole where sea
water was vomited out. The same thing as before happened. He pulled a
halibut out.

And when his wife went after some water, lo, her husband sat near the
creek and said to her: “That was the same one who is always doing such
things. Stop all the holes in the house. As soon as he drifted away
from it (the island) I wished my hair-seal club would swim over to me.”
And to him it swam out. Then it brought him to the land, they say.

Then he ran in with the hair-seal club. And he (Raven) ran squawking
about the house. By and by he knocked him down with his club. Then he
threw him down into the latrine. And after he had lain there a while he
spoke up out of it. [239] Then he took him out and pounded him up
again. He even pounded up his bones. And he went down to the beach at
low tide and rolled a big rock over upon him.

[End of so-called “old man’s story” and beginning of “young man’s” part
[240]]

Then he was nearly covered by the tide. And he changed himself in
different ways. By and by, when only his beak showed above water, his
ten supernatural helpers came to him. Then they rolled the rock off
from him, and he drifted away. The first to smell him among his
supernatural helpers was a Tlingit, who wore a bone in his nose [like
the shamans.]

After he had drifted away for a while, some people came along in a
canoe. “Why does the chief float about upon the water?” And when they
got within a short distance he said: “He has a hard time for going
after a woman.”

And after he had drifted about a while longer, a black whale came along
blowing. And he thought, “I wish it would swallow me.” And, as he
wished, it swallowed him. Then he ate up its insides. After he had
eaten all he thought: “I wish it would drift ashore with me in front of
a town.” And in front of a town it drifted ashore with him.

After they had spent some time in cutting it up, they cut a hole
through right where he was, and he flew out. Then he flew straight up.
And he turned down at the end of the town, pulled off the skin of an
old man living there, threw away his bones, went into his skin, and
lived in his place instead of him. By and by they asked him about the
something that came out of the whale’s belly. Then he said: “When
something similar happened a long time ago they fled from each other in
fear.” At once they fled from each other in fear. And afterward he ate
the whale they were bringing up. This was why he had changed himself.

[Told by Tom Stevens, chief of Those-born-at-House-Point.]

And one time he had Hair-seal as his wife. Then they had a child. And
one day he went after firewood with him. His son was fat, and, pleased
at the sight of him, he wanted to eat him. Then he said to him: “I am
within a little of eating you.” And after they had come home, and had
got through eating, he said to his mother: “Ha ha⁺, mama, my father
said to me: ‘I am within a little of eating you.’” And Raven said:
“Stop the child.” He made him ashamed. After that he devoured him.
[241]

[Continued by the Chief of Kloo.]

And after he had traveled about a while from that place he came to
another town. And he was eating the leavings cut off of the salmon they
brought in. By and by some of the milt [242] hung out of his nose. Then
he said to his cousin [Eagle]: “When I pass in front of the town,
cousin, say: ‘Wā-ā-ā [243], one goes along in front of the town with a
weasel hanging from his nose.’” And when he passed in front of the
village [he said], “Wā-ā-ā, one passes in front of the town with the
milt of a salmon hanging from his nose.” Then he went back to him and
said: “Cousin, say, ‘Weasel, weasel.’” But when he went again he said
the same thing. Then he made him ashamed, and he went right along
[without stopping].

And after he had gone along for a while he met some people coming back
from the hunt with many hair seals. Then he changed himself into a
woman. And he found a long, slender rock and said to it: “Change into a
child,” and it became a human being. “Say, you who are coming, come and
marry me.” Then the canoe was pointed toward her. And she picked up
stones, too, they say. After they had gone along for a while she said:
“The child wants hair seal. He is crying for it.” Then one cut off a
piece for it. Then she wished a mist to fall, and it happened. Then
they put mats over her, under which she ate it. And she put grease on
the stones and threw them overboard. And she kept saying that it was
the hair seal. Then they gave some to her again.

Then they gave her as wife to one of them. Some time after he had
married her they gave her salmon roe to eat. And she saw where they
kept it. Then she went to the place at night. And she ate in it. But
when she lay down afterward she found that her labret was lost. And
when they went [to the box] to get some again in the morning they found
her labret in it. Upon this she touched it quickly with her lips and
said: “Lg̣ᴀ′nsal stā′-is [244] was flapping her wings all night in my
lip as she always does when she wants something that smells bad.” Then
they handed it to her, and she put it back into her lip.

And one day, when she went out with others to defecate, and stood up,
the tail coming from her buttocks was visible a moment. “Ai-ī, what is
that sticking from my son’s wife’s buttocks?” “Why, this is not the
first time a Tlingit woman’s tail stuck out from her buttocks.”

By and by she told her husband they were about to come after her, and
she made them bring together firewood in preparation for it. Then she
changed excrement into people and made them come by canoe. Then they
landed; but when they came in and sat down they began to perspire.
Right there they were melted. And she became ashamed. Then they were
completely melted. And she flew away.

And after he (Raven) had traveled on from that place he came to where
Water-ousel [245] lived. And he (the bird) gave him food. By and by he
drove a stick into his leg, out of which salmon roe [such as has lain
some days after hatching] ran in a stream. He gave it to him to eat.
Then he started from that place. After he had traveled for a while he
came to where Sea-lion lived. And after he had given him some food he
roasted his hand, out of which grease dropped. That he gave him to eat.
He started off, and when he had traveled a while came to where
Hair-seal lived. Then he, too, roasted his hand in the fire, and grease
came out. He gave it to him to eat.

Then he went away and lived in one place for a while. After he had
lived there for a time Water-ousel came in to him. Then he drove
something into his leg, but only made himself faint away. And he (the
bird) was ashamed. While he was in the faint he went off. Then he came
to himself. And after he had continued living there for a while
Sea-lion and Hair-seal came in. [246] Then he roasted his hand, but it
was burned. And they left him. Afterward he came to life again.

[Parts of the young man’s story told by Walter McGregor of the
Qā′-i-ał-lā′nas]

He began to offer his sister in marriage, and when any creature came in
to him he looked at its buttocks. When they were lean he refused it.
After he had done [lit., said] this for a while Sea-lion wanted to many
his sister. Then he looked at his buttocks. They were fat, and he let
him marry his sister. They had two children. G̣ē′noa [247] was the
elder. Iwā′ldjida was the younger. Once Raven went out fishing with his
brother-in-law and thought: “I wish halibut would come to me only.”
Then he only caught halibut. And his brother-in-law, Sea-lion, asked
him: “Say, why do they come to you?” “That is something people are not
brave enough to ask for.” Then he again asked him, and he said to him:
“Well, they like me, because I use a piece of skin cut from my testes
for bait.” And he told him to do the same to his. When he just touched
them with a knife, “Wā-wa-wa-wā′, it hurts,” he said to him. “Don’t you
see you are not brave enough for it?” Then he told him to do as before.
Then he cut off the whole of his testes and ate the fat part of his
brother-in-law. After he had consumed it he put stones in him in its
place, and came to his sister singing a crying song: “Siwa′s’s husband,
my sister’s husband. Siwa′s’s husband, my sister’s husband.” Then his
sister asked him: “What has happened, brother?” He paid no attention to
her. He sang the crying song. “What is it?” she kept saying. By and by
she asked her brother: “What has happened, my brother Raven?” And he
said to her: “Where they always do so, [the enemy] stood at
House-point. With my great brother-in-law I met them. My great
brother-in-law fell without speaking a word. I, however, went around
and around them calling.” Then his sister, too, sang a crying song. She
had G̣ē′noa on her back and held Iwā′ldjida in her hands. Then she sang
the crying song: “G̣ē′noa’s father, Iwā′ldjida’s father. G̣ē′noa’s
father, Iwā′ldjida’s father.” At once they carried him up in a mat. And
Siwa′s said: “Say, chief, why is your brother-in-law so heavy?” Then
Raven said: “You always talk nonsense. This is not the first time a
chief who has been killed is heavy.” The rocks put into him made him
heavy.

After they got him into the house they had Mallard-duck [248] doctor
him, and when he came in, and had gone around the fire for a while, he
said: “Hăn hăn hăn hăn (quacking of duck), his brother-in-law, his
brother-in-law.” And Raven said: “[Speak] differently, great doctor.
[Speak] differently.” Then again he said, “Hăn hăn hăn hăn, his
brother-in-law took out his insides.” Then he kicked him into the fire.
And just before he flew out he said the same thing. So they came to
know that he had killed his brother-in-law.

One time he let Cormorant marry Siwa′s, because he was the best
fisherman. And he went out fishing with him, and Cormorant alone caught
halibut. He (Raven) caught only a small one. Then he went toward the
bow to Cormorant and said to him: “Let me see what is upon your
tongue.” And when he ran his tongue out he pulled it out, and his voice
was gone. That is why the cormorant has no voice.

Then he pulled the halibut round toward himself [so that their heads
lay in his direction] and turned the small one toward him (Cormorant).
[249] Then they went home, and he pulled off the halibut. Cormorant
motioned his wife to the halibut, and his sister asked: “Say, chief,
why does he motion me to the halibut?” Then Raven said: “He is trying
to say he wants the head of a big one.” And she asked her brother
again: “Say, chief, what has happened to your brother-in-law?” “Why,
while I was fishing with him his voice left him.” He wanted to eat all
the halibut. That is why he took it out.

After he had gone on for some distance a sea anemone (?) looked out
from under a rock. He became fascinated at the sight of the corners of
its eyes, which were bluish, and said to it: “Say, cousin, come and let
me kiss you.” And the sea anemone said: “I know your words, Raven,” and
made him angry. Then he threw aside the stones from it and steamed it
[in the ground]. When it was cooked he ate it while it was still hot.
Then his heart was burst with the burning. That is why ravens do not
eat sea anemones.

After he had gone along from there for a while he came to a town.
Having looked into the house [he saw] no people there. Then he entered.
Halibut and slices of smoked hair seal lay on the drying frame. Only
old wedges lay near the fire. But when he started to carry off the
halibut and slices of seal a wedge threw itself at his ankle bone; on
the other side the same thing happened, and he fainted with the pain.
Then he threw them from his shoulders and went out. And he looked into
a house near by. And he entered that, too. There were plenty of hair
seals and halibut there. On the wall was some design drawn with finger
nails. Then he started to carry some out. When he came to the door
something pulled his hair. He saw nothing. After they had pulled his
hair until they made him weak, he went out. These were the Shadow
people, they say.

After he had traveled thence for a while he came to a house in which
the Herring people were dancing. The air (weather or sky) [250] even
shook above them. And when he looked in the Herring people spawned upon
his mustache. Then he ate the fish eggs. They tasted bad, and he threw
away his mustache. [251] Then, having pushed in a young hemlock he had
broken off, he drew it out. The fish eggs were thick upon it, and he
ate them. They tasted good. He started the use [of these limbs].

After he had gone on for a while he came to one who had a fire in his
house. And he did not know how to get his live coals. And [the man] had
bought a deerskin. “Say, cousin, I want to borrow your skin a while.”
And he lent it to him. It had a long tail, they say, and he tied a
bundle of pitch wood to the end of the tail. Then he came in and danced
before him. As he danced his face was turned toward the fire only.
After he had danced for a time he struck his tail into the fire and the
pitch wood burned. Then his tail was burned off. That is why the deer’s
tail is short. Then he went into his own skin and flew away with the
live coals. His beak, too, was burned off. And they pursued him. They
could not catch him and came back. He got the coals neatly.

On traveling thence he found a devilfish’s nose (i.e., mouth) drifted
ashore. And he took it and came to Screech-owl. And he said to him:
“Say, cousin, let me borrow your beak a while,” and he lent it to him.
Then he stuck the devilfish nose he had found in its place and said to
him: “Say, cousin, yours looks nice. You are fit to travel about with
the supernatural beings.”

After he had traveled on for a while his cousin (Eagle) came to him.
And, after they had traveled together for a while they came to an
abundance of berries, which Eagle consumed before he got there. On that
account he was angry with him. And he went quickly to the beach, found
a sharp fish bone, and stuck it into the moss ahead of him (Eagle).
“Run into Eagle’s foot,” he said to the bone. And he said to Eagle:
“Now, cousin, go right on here before me.” And as he went along there
the bone stuck into his foot. “Cousin, let me see it,” and he pretended
to take it out with his teeth, but instead commenced to push it in
farther. “Wā-wā-wā, cousin, you are pushing it in.” “No, cousin, it is
because I am trying to pull it out with my teeth.” By and by he pulled
it out and said to him: “Cousin, wait right here.” Then he examined the
ground before him [to select an easy path]. And he ordered a chasm to
form. It did so. And, breaking off a stalk of łqeā′ma, [252] he laid it
across the gulf and put moss upon it. He made it like a dead, fallen
tree. Then he went back toward Eagle, carried him on his back, and
started over with him upon the dead tree. When he got halfway over he
let him go. “Yauwaiyā′, what I carry on my back is heavy.” He burst
open below. Then he went down to him and ate his berries. He ate all
and started off.

After he had traveled for a while he came to a woman with a good-sized
labret weaving a water-tight basket, and he asked her: “Say, skᴀñ,
[253] have you seen my cousin?” She paid no attention to him, and he
again said to her: “Say, skᴀñ, have you seen my cousin?” Again she paid
no attention to him. “Skᴀñ, I can knock out your labret.” “Don’t. Over
yonder is a qꜝa′ła [254] point, beyond which is a spruce point, beyond
which is a hemlock point, beyond which is an alder point. At that point
in front of the shell of a sqā′djix̣ū [255] on which he is drawing is
your cousin.” Then he started over, and it was as she said. “Say,
cousin, is that you?” [he said], and he pulled him up straight, and
they started off together.

After they had gone on they came to a town. They (the people) were glad
to see them. Then they began giving them food. When they gave them
berries to eat they asked Eagle: “Does the chief eat these?” And Raven
said: “Say that I like them very much.” But Eagle said: “The chief says
he never eats them.” And they only gave them to him (Eagle). And again
they gave him good berries to eat, and he said: “Those, too, the chief
does not like.”[255]

When he was going on from there he came to a town in which the chief’s
son, who was the strongest man, had had his arm pulled out. A shaman
came to try to cure him. The chief’s son was the strongest man. In
trying strength with people of all ages by locking hands with them he
could beat them. By and by, through the smoke hole came a small pale
hand, and [they heard its owner] say: “Gū′sg̣a gᴀ′msiwa” (Tsimshian
words meaning “Let us have a try”). And he put his fingers to it. It
pulled off his arm. They did not know what it was. And he (Raven) alone
knew that one of Gū′g̣ał’s [256] sons had pulled his arm off. Then he
flew to Gū′g̣ał’s town, went to an old man who lived at the end of the
town and asked him: “Say, old man, do you ever gamble?” And he said he
did. “They say they pulled off the arm of a chief’s son. I wonder where
the person who did it belongs.” And he said: “Why, don’t you know? It
was done by the one of Gū′g̣ał’s sons who is always doing those things.
The chief’s son’s arm is in a box behind the screen in his father’s
house.” And he (Raven) said: “Well, although everybody knows those
things, I was asking this.” Then he pulled off his (the old man’s) skin
and entered it. And next day he took a gambling-stick bag and walked
with a cane to the middle of the town. When he sat down he heard
Gū′g̣ał’s sons say: “You are always on hand, old man; we will gamble
with you.” The eldest wagered him his hair ribbon, and they gambled
with him. They lost the ribbon to him. Then it was too late to go home,
and he said: “I will stay right in your house.” And they said to him:
“All right, old man, sleep in our house so that we may gamble with each
other in the morning.” Then he entered, and they seated him near two
good-looking women. They gave him something to eat. “Old man, you are
always ready,” they said to him, and they went to bed. Then he broke
wind. The women laughed at him every time as they whispered together.
By and by, when they were asleep, [257] he flew lightly toward the
screen and felt of the chief’s son’s arm which was in a box. Then he
waited for daylight and flew over it. As he did so the ends of his
claws touched the top of the screen. It sounded like a drum. Then he
lay down quickly. “Alas! it is the one who is always doing such things.
Does the old man lie there as before?” And the women said: “Yes; he
lies here. He has been breaking wind all the time. Now, he is snoring.”
And he asked again: “Is the chief’s son’s arm in the box?” And the
women said: “Yes; it is here.” Then when they were asleep again and day
had begun to break he flew up easily behind the screen and seized the
chief’s son’s arm in his mouth. And when he flew away with it the ends
of his claws touched the top of the screen. When it gave forth a
drumming sound all looked up. He flew through the smoke hole. The chief
said: “Alas! it is he who is always doing such things.” Then he came
flying to the chief’s son’s father’s town and began to act as shaman
around the chief’s son. He washed the arm, which had begun to smell
badly [from decomposition]. Then they handed him a new mat [and he
laid] the chief’s son’s arm in place under it. At once his arm was
restored. They gave many things to him and much food as well.

He started from that place also. After he had gone along for a while he
came to a town. The town people were glad to see him, and he went into
a house. A good looking woman lived in the house. Then they went to
bed, and he went over to the woman. When he came to her she asked him,
“Who are you?” “I am one who came to this place for you.” But the woman
absolutely repulsed him. Then he went away from her. And when the woman
slept he went to her again and put dung inside of her blanket. Then he
cried: “I went to the chief’s daughter, but, finding something terrible
there, changed my mind.” And the woman awoke and said: “A′-a-a a-a′,
don’t tell anybody about it. I will give you a substance that my father
owns but always keeps secret.” And he said: “[Give me] some.” Then she
gave all to him. And the woman said to him: “Don’t lose it. With that
you will have good luck. And when you see anyone, you can adorn him
with it,” she said to him. This is what causes people to be
good-looking.

After that his sister Siwa′s planted Indian tobacco in front of White
inlet. And, while it was yet in the garden, he calcined shells. But
before he pulled the tobacco out he became angry with the calcined
shells and threw them away. Where the calcined shells were the surface
of the rocks is white.

There he went out fishing for his sister. He threw the halibut ashore.
There is high, level land there called “Halibut’s place.” He named
places, too, as he went along. “Your name will be like this; you will
be called so-and-so,” he said as he went. Then he passed over one
place, and it called after him: “What shall my name be?” Then he said
to it in the Ninstints dialect: “Your name will be ‘Salt Stone,’ you
common object.”

Then he set out to spear Bad Weather (Tcꜝī′g̣a). He made a spear with a
detachable point. He used strong gut for cord. And he saw its head
pass. Then he speared it. And it tugged him about in a sitting posture.
He kept hold of the cord and was pulled out to a reef lying in front.
After he had been pulled about there a while the spear point broke.
[The string] struck on the face of a declivity. There the rocks show a
white streak.

When he went away he stuck an eagle’s tail feather [into a certain
place]. That is called “Eagle’s-tail-feather-stuck-in.”

After that he was love-sick for his uncle’s wife. Then he sat there
singing a song, at the same time striking his head upon the rocks for a
drum. There he made a hole. That place is called
“Moving-the-back-part-of-the-head-about-while-singing.”

[Told by Abraham of Those-born-at-Qꜝā′dᴀsg̣o]

One time, when he was going along with his cousin, he came to an island
of ʟꜝkꜝia′o. [258] At once he went out and ate them. After he got
through eating, he went back toward shore with his cousin. And when
they became thirsty he said to his cousin: “Take one stroke in the
water, cousin.” As soon as he did so they came to Standing-water creek,
which was very far away. Where he drank there, there is a water hole of
the shape of his bill.

This is why, when people travel by canoe on the west coast, the country
is easy for them (i.e., they travel about easily). The place where he
and his cousin ate ʟꜝkꜝia′o is called “Pulled-off-with-the-teeth.”
[259]

[Told by Tom Stevens, chief of Those-born-at-House-point]

When he (Raven) first started traveling about, numbers of persons lay
along the ground, acting as if ashamed. Then he pulled them upright as
he ran along. These were the mountains.

Another version

[Told to Prof. Franz Boas by Charlie Edenshaw, chief of the Stᴀ′stas]

Nenk·îlsʟasʟiñgai’s [260] mother was Gēʟîk·ᴇdzā′t (“Flood-tide-woman”).
His father was ʟg̣ang̣ag·îñ (“Dorsal-fin”), [261] whose sister’s son was
called ʟg̣anxē′la (“Hole-in-dorsal fin”). He was born in Naēku′n. Now,
Nenk·îlsʟasʟiñgai was crying all the time. The people tried to quiet
him, and they gave him various things to play with, but he was not
satisfied. There was a young girl, Qalgaitsadas (“Ice-woman”). [262]
She also tried to quiet him. She took him in her arms, and he at once
ceased crying. He touched her breasts and was quiet. After a little
while she returned him to his mother. At once he began to cry again,
but when she took him again he quieted down when he touched her breast.

The boy was growing up very rapidly. Now he was able to walk. ʟg̣anxē′la
was his mother’s lover. When his father, ʟg̣ang̣ag·îñ, found this out he
became jealous, and he sent his wife back to her uncle, Nenk·îlsʟas.
Then she took her boy on her back and went to her uncle’s house. About
noon she felt hungry. She was going to start a fire, but she did not
succeed. She turned the fire drill until her hands were sore, but she
did not succeed in making a fire. Then Nenk·îlsʟasʟiñgai went into the
woods, where he took two large sticks. He struck the ends together, and
at once there was a great fire. His mother was surprised to see it, but
she did not make any remark.

In the evening they lay down and slept. Early the next morning they
proceeded on their journey. In the evening the mother tried again to
start a fire, but she did not succeed. Then the boy went to the woods
and started the fire in the same manner as on the preceding day.

Finally they reached the house of Nenk·îlsʟas, which was located in
ʟg̣aē′xa. [263] A large pole was standing in front of his house.
Nenk·îlsʟas’s slaves were outside the house when Gēʟîk·ᴇdzā′t was
approaching, carrying her child. They entered the house and told
Nenk·îlsʟas that she was approaching. He remarked: “She is always
acting foolishly, therefore she has been sent back.” He told his slaves
to call her into the house. She entered and remained sitting near the
doorway. She did not go to the rear of the house. Her uncle gave her
food. The boy was defecating in the house all the time. His excrements
were very thin and spread over the floor, so that the house smelled
very badly.

The boy was staying with his mother. In the night, when everybody was
asleep, he arose from the side of his mother, left the house, taking
bow and arrows, and shot woodpeckers (sʟō′ts’ada). He gave them to his
mother and asked her to make a blanket of their skins. His mother dried
these skins and sewed them up. Then he began to shoot whales, which he
took to a little river near ʟgaē′xa, named Xagusiua′s. [264] Then Raven
came right down from the sky, intending to eat the whales. The boy
tried to shoot it, but he was unable to kill it. Raven flew away, but
soon returned. Again the boy tried to shoot it, but did not hit it.
Finally, however, he succeeded in killing Raven. He hid its skin
between the branches of a large tree.

One day the boy said to his uncle: “My fathers are going to come from
Naēku′n to look for my mother.” Then his uncle remarked: “I am afraid
that boy is going to cause us trouble. Stop your talking.” But
Nenk·îlsʟasʟiñgai repeated his former statement. The following day he
said again: “My fathers are going to come from Naēku′n to see me.”
Again his uncle begged him to be silent, but he did not obey.

After a few days the people from Naēku′n arrived. The beach was covered
with canoes. Then his uncle felt greatly troubled. He had many slaves.
The boy said to one of the slaves: “Go out and tell them to come
ashore.” His fathers were the Killer-whales. Then they came ashore and
fell down. His father and his cousin ʟganxē′la were among those whales.
Then his mother took a bailer and sprinkled some water over ʟganxē′la,
while she left her husband to perish. After some time the boy said to a
slave: “Go out and call the water to cover my fathers.” Then the tide
returned, and the whales returned to Naēku′n. The boy continued to
shoot birds.

His uncle’s wife was making mats all the time. The boy was very
beautiful, but he continued to defecate in the house. His uncle’s wife
was sitting in the rear of the house. The boy had collected much red
gum, which he was chewing. One day he returned home just at the time
when his uncle had finished his dinner and was washing his face. Then
his uncle’s wife asked him for some gum which was hanging out of the
boy’s mouth. The boy fell in love with his uncle’s wife, who was
sitting on the highest platform of the house. The boy crept silently up
to the woman and encircled her, placing his head under her left arm,
his body over her back, and his feet under her right arm. When the
woman looked down she saw that he was very pretty. His uncle did not
notice it. He (the uncle) was a great hunter, and he always brought
back a great quantity of food. Every evening, when his uncle had gone
out hunting, he visited the woman. [The boy was staying in the house
all the time; his soul went out hunting birds and visiting the woman.]
As soon as he reached the woman it thundered, and he was much
frightened. He defecated, and the house was so full of excrements that
the slaves had to carry them out in buckets. When his uncle
Nenk·îlsʟasʟiñgai came home he was about to give the game to his wife.
He asked her why it had thundered that day. “It is a sign that my
nephew cohabits with you [he said].”

In the village T’ano [265] there was a chief whose name was Qîng·. The
boy said: “I want Qîng· to come here to be my father.” His uncle, who
was sitting in the rear of the house, heard what he was saying. He
asked his sister to command the boy to be silent, but he continued to
say it. One day many canoes arrived on the beach. Then the boy said to
his uncle: “The chiefs are coming. What are you going to do?” His uncle
did not reply because he was afraid. When they approached the house the
boy threw off his skin, and he was beautiful.

The chief who arrived here was called Qoēqqu′ns. [266] He lived in the
middle of the ocean. He was his mother’s father. The boy had visited
him and had borrowed his people, whom he took to his uncle’s house. He
had put on his woodpecker blanket, and he flew to his grandfather’s
house. He painted his face with a design of Ts’agul [267] and made
himself very beautiful. When he returned he walked about inside the
house scolding his uncle: “Why is there nobody staying with you? Now,
all the chiefs are coming, and there is nobody to receive them.” Then
Nenk·îlsʟasʟiñgai stamped his feet, and immediately the house was full
of people. He had transformed the dirt on the floor of the house into
people by stamping once. In one corner of his house were Qoēqqu′ns’s
people, who spoke the Tsimshian language. When he stamped with his foot
in another corner of the house people appeared who spoke Heiltsuk (or
Wakashan). In the next corner, when he stamped the ground, the Haida
arose, and in the last corner he also created Haida.

After a while Qîng· arrived. They performed a dance, and
Nenk·îlsʟasʟiñgai gave them to eat. Then Qîng· returned to his own
country. The boy accompanied him. When he made the Tsimshian he wore a
flicker [268] (Sqaldzit) blanket. Then he changed and wore a woodpecker
(sʟodz’adang) blanket. Afterward he used a Six­asʟdᴀlgang [269]
blanket. This is a large bird with yellow head, which flies very
rapidly. Finally he used a T’in [270] blanket. This is a bird that is
eaten in Victoria. When they arrived in Qîng·’s house Nenk·îlsʟasʟiñgai
sat between Qîng· and his wife. The chief asked him: “Are you hungry?”
But he did not want to eat. He was chewing gum all the time. In the
house there were many people. Two youths were standing on one side of
the door when the chief was eating. The chief sent some food to them.
Their skin was quite black. Their name was Squl (“Porpoise”). They were
eating ravenously. The boy asked: “How is it that you can eat so much?”
They replied: “Don’t ask us. We are very poor because we are hungry all
the time.” But he insisted. He said: “I can not eat, and I must learn
how to eat. You must assist me to learn.” They refused, but
Nenk·îlsʟasʟiñgai insisted. They said: “We are afraid of your father.
If we tell you, you will have bad luck.” But the boy would not accept
their statements. Then they became angry and said: “Go and bathe, and
when you do so scratch your skin and eat what you scratch off. Do so
twice.” The youth did so, and then he became very hungry. He told his
father: “I am a little hungry.” Then the old man was very glad. He
called all the people to see how his child was eating. The people came,
and when they had seen it they returned. After a very short time the
youth was hungry again. His father invited the people, and after they
had eaten they went away. It was not long before the boy was hungry
again. He could not get enough to eat. He ate all the provisions that
were stored in the house. Then Qîng· turned the boy out of his house
and he was very poor. He asked to be admitted again, but Qîng· did not
allow him to enter. Then he took his raven skin and put it on. He
knocked the walls of the house with his beak, asking admission, but he
was refused.

He promised to give them fox, mountain goat, and other kinds of
animals. Then he went down to the beach, where he ate some excrements.
After a while he returned to the house and asked again for admission.
Then the boy grew angry, and wished the waters to rise. The waters
began to rise, and rose up to Qîng·’s throat. Then Qîng·’s sister and
her ten children began to climb up his hat, which was transformed into
a mountain, which may still be seen near the village. There is another
mountain near by which is called Qîñg·i xa′ñginᴇñ gutas’wa′s.

Then the boy returned to his uncle, and the people returned to their
villages. The boy was in love with his uncle’s wife, and his uncle was
jealous. Then he called upon the waters to rise, intending to kill his
nephew. The waters were coming out of Nenk·îlsʟas’s hat. Then the boy
took the skin of a waterfowl (Q’ē′sq’ut), [271] which he put on. The
house began to fill with water. Then he swam about on the water. He was
carrying the raven skin under his arm. When the water rose still
higher, he flew up through the smoke hole and reached the sky. He shot
an arrow up to the sky, which stuck in it. Then he continued to shoot,
hitting the nock of the first arrow; and thus he proceeded, making a
chain which reached almost down into the waters. Finally he fastened
his bow to the lowest arrow and climbed upward. When he reached the
sky, he broke it, went through, and saw five countries above. First he
came to an open place in which many berries were growing. There were
salmon in the rivers, and the people were singing. He was chewing gum.
He tried to find the singers, but he could not discover them. He passed
the place whence the noise proceeded, and turned back again. Finally,
after a long time, he found them. He saw a number of women who were
singing. He asked them, “Where did you obtain this song? I like it very
much.” Then they laughed at him, and said, “Did you never hear that
there are five countries up here, and that the inhabitants use this
song? They are singing about Nenk·îlsʟasʟîñgai′, who is in love with
his uncle’s wife.” At that time he received the name
Nenk·îlsʟasʟîñgai′. He wandered about in heaven for many years, singing
all the time.

He came to a large river, where he heard the people singing. He came to
a town near which he saw a pond. The chief’s daughter went out to fetch
water. Then Nenk·îlsʟasʟîñgai′ transformed himself into the leaf of a
hemlock, and dropped into the bucket of water which the chief’s
daughter dipped from the pond. When she attempted to drink, the hemlock
leaf was in her way, and she tried to blow it away, but did not
succeed. Finally she grew impatient and swallowed it with the water.
After two months she had a child, and her father was very glad. The
child slept at his mother’s side, but at midnight, when all were
asleep, he traveled all over the country and came to a town. The people
were all asleep, and during the night he ate their eyes. When the
people awoke in the morning, they found that they were blind. They
asked one another, “Did not you hear a story about such a thing
happening?” But the old people said they never had heard of such a
thing. The next night he proceeded to another town, where he also ate
the eyes of all the people. Then he did the same in a third town. The
people did not know how they lost their eyesight. Finally he went to a
fourth town and ate the eyes of the people.

There was an old man in the corner of the chief’s house. He did not
sleep because he wished to discover how the people in the various towns
were blinded. One night he saw the boy arise from the side of his
mother and return early in the morning. He returned with his skin
blanket filled with something. The old man saw him sitting down near
his mother’s fire and taking out something round from his blanket.
While doing so he was laughing. Then the old man knew that he had taken
the eyes of the people.

When, the next morning, the people heard that the inhabitants of
another town had lost their eyes the old man said that he had seen how
the young man ate the eyes while his mother was asleep, that he had
carried them back to the house in his blanket, and that he had eaten
them sitting near the fire.

The floor of the house was made of stone. The chief then broke it, took
the boy, and threw him down to our earth. At that time the water was
still high, and only the top of his totem pole was seen above the
surface of the water. The boy dropped upon the top of the totem pole,
crying “Qa!” and assumed the shape of a raven. The pole split in two
when he dropped down upon it. Then the waters began to subside, and he
began his migrations.

He went to a rock from which the wind was blowing all the time. He
intended to kill the [s. e.] wind, Xēiō′. He tried to make canoes from
various kinds of wood, but they did not satisfy him. Then he asked the
birds to carry him there, but they could not do it. Finally he took the
maple tree, and he succeeded in making a good canoe. He vanquished the
wind and made him his slave.

Xāusgana [272] was fishing for halibut. The Raven went to visit him. He
was kindly received, because Xāusgana did not know that he was trying
to steal food wherever he went. One morning when he went out fishing
Raven said: “On my travels I saw a large island on which there are a
great many woodpeckers.” Xāusgana believed him. He said: “Let us go and
see it.” One day, when the water was calm, they started, accompanied by
Xāusgana’s wife. They paddled toward the island, and Raven said: “Stay
here in the canoe while I go ashore to hunt woodpeckers in the woods.”
There were many sʟāskʼᴇma (a plant bearing something resembling
berries) in the woods. Raven took one of these and struck his nose
until it bled. Then he transformed the blood into woodpeckers. Then he
went back to the canoe and said: “Did you see the woodpeckers coming
out of the woods?” By this time many woodpeckers had come out from
under the trees, and Xāusgana became eager to hunt them. Fishermen are
in the habit of tying the red feathers of the woodpeckers to their
hooks in order to secure good luck. [273]

As soon as Xāusgana had gone a hunting Raven went back to the canoe. He
lay down in it and thought: “I wish that a wind would start from the
island and that the canoe would drift away!” He pulled his blanket over
his head and pretended to sleep. Now a wind arose, and the canoe
drifted away. When Xāusgana saw this he shouted: “Wake up! You are
drifting out to sea!” but Raven did not stir. Then Xāusgana was greatly
troubled because he had lost his canoe. As soon as Raven was out of
sight he assumed the shape of Xāusgana and turned the canoe toward his
house. He went up to the house and said to Xāusgana’s wife: [274] “That
man who came visiting us is Raven. He is a liar.” Then the woman gave
him to eat, and after he had finished the food he asked for more. The
woman remarked: “How does it happen that you are so hungry now?
Formerly you never ate as much as you do to-day.” She was unable to
satisfy his hunger. At night he lay down with her. He lived in the
house, and people believed that he was Xāusgana.

The latter was staying on the island, unable to leave it. After a while
he thought: “I wish my rattle would come here!” The rattle obeyed his
summons. Then he wished his bow to come. Then he walked home over the
surface of the water as though it were firm land. He reached his
village. After a while he saw his wife coming out of the house. He
called her and told her: “The Raven has cheated you. Let us take
revenge. Close all the chinks of our house and lock the door. When
everything is done shut the smoke hole; then I will appear and take
revenge.” The woman reentered the house and acted as though nothing had
happened. She prepared food for him, and he ate. While he was eating he
said all the time: “It is strange how much I have changed. Formerly I
was never as hungry as I am now.”

Meanwhile the woman closed all the chinks of the house. Then Xāusgana
entered. Raven put on his skin and tried to escape, but Xāusgana caught
him and killed him. He broke his bones to pieces and threw him into the
latrine. On the following day when his wife went to defecate Raven spit
upward at her genitalia. He took the body and struck it again, and he
took a large stone and pounded it to jelly. Then he threw it into the
sea. It drifted about on the water. One day many people went out in
their canoe. When they saw the body they remarked: “Why is that chief
drifting about on the water?” And the body replied, “A woman is the
cause of this.”

After a while he thought, “I wish that a whale would come and swallow
me!” Then the whale came and swallowed him.

Here follows the story of the Raven in the Whale.

The whale stranded and was discovered by the people. They came and cut
it. Then Raven thought: “I wish that the chief’s son would open the
whale’s stomach, that I may get out again!” At once the chief’s son cut
open the whale’s stomach. Then Raven flew out right against the young
man’s chest. The youth fell down dead. Then the people were afraid, and
ran away.

Raven flew into the woods, and assumed the shape of an old man. He came
back, leaning on a staff, and asked the people: “Why are you running
away?” They told him what had happened. Then he said, “I heard that the
same events happened long ago. At that time the people left the town,
leaving all their property behind. I think it would be best for you to
do the same.” Then the people, who were much afraid, left the village
at once. Raven stayed behind, and ate all their provisions.

Beaver [275] was a chief who had his room in the rear of a very
beautiful house. Behind the house there was a large lake, where Beaver
went to play. Then he returned to his house. In the lake there were
many salmon, and on the shores were growing all kinds of berries. When
he returned home he carried a fish, which he boiled.

One day Raven, who desired to rob Beaver of his treasures, disguised
himself as a poor, ugly person. In this shape he went to Beaver’s
house. In the evening Beaver came home, bringing a fish and berries,
which he intended to boil. Raven arranged it so that he should meet
him. Then Beaver asked: “What are you doing here?” Raven replied: “My
father has just died. He said that you are my brother. We have the same
ancestors. He told me to go to visit you and to ask you for food.” Then
Beaver invited him to his house. He boiled his fish, and when it was
cooked he let Raven partake of the meal. He believed him and pitied
him.

Next day Beaver went to the lake. He told Raven to stay at home. Toward
noon he returned, carrying a salmon, and he spoke kindly to Raven,
promising to feed him all the time. He told him that there were always
fish in the lake and ripe berries on its shores.

On the following day Raven went out to the lake. He rolled up the water
like a blanket, took a number of fish out, boiled them, and ate them.
When Beaver came home he found Raven crying and pretending to be
hungry. On the following day Raven went out again. He rolled up the
water, took it in his beak, and flew away. He alighted on the top of a
large cedar tree.

When Beaver went out in order to fish in his lake he found that it was
gone, and he saw Raven sitting on a tree, holding the water. Then
Beaver called the monster Tā′ʟat’adᴇga, [276] which has a long body, a
long tail, and many legs; and he called all the beavers and the bears
and asked them to throw the tree down. The wolves dug up its roots, the
beavers gnawed the trunk of the tree, and all the animals tried to do
what was in their power. Finally the tree fell. Then Raven flew off to
another tree. They tried to throw this tree down. All the animals of
the forest helped Beaver. After they had thrown down four trees they
asked a favor of Raven: “Please give us our chief’s water. Don’t make
us unhappy!” But he did not comply with their request. He flew away,
and spit some of the water on the ground as he flew along. Thus
originated all the rivers on Queen Charlotte islands. He also made the
Skeena and Stikine rivers.

There was a man named K·ʼî′lkun, who lived at Skidegate. He asked Raven
to give him some water. Raven complied with his request, but gave him
very little only. This annoyed him so much that he fell down dead. He
forms the long point of land near Skidegate. [277] The same thing
happened at Naēku′n. [278] For this reason there is a long point of
land at that place.

This is the best known, as it is the longest, of all stories told on
the upper northwest coast, and many writers have given fragments of it.
Although often spoken of as the creation legend, it would be more
correct to say that it explains how things were altered from one state
or condition into that in which we now find them. Thus topographic
features, natural phenomena, the tastes, passions, habits, and customs
of animals and human beings are mainly explained by referring to
something that Raven did in ancient times. He was not the only
originator of all these things, but he was the principal, and for that
reason he was known as Nᴀñkî′lsʟas (“He-whose-voice-is-obeyed”). Until
Qî′ñgî adopted him he was called Nᴀñkî′lsʟas-łîña′-i
(“The-potential-Nᴀñkî′lsʟas”). Some even said that Nᴀñkî′lsʟas was a
great chief who put on the skin of a raven only when he wanted to act
like a buffoon. Among the three peoples who have developed this story
most—Haida, Tlingit, and Tsimshian—the Raven clan is also of very great
importance, and it is evident to me that there is a causal relation
between the two facts. I have, however, discussed the singular
prominence of the Raven clan among the people in this region in volume
V, part 1, of the Memoirs of the Jesup North Pacific Expedition, page
104.

Aware of the important position held by this myth, I made a special
endeavor to secure as much of it as possible and consulted several
different story-tellers. The main portion of the story was given me by
John Sky, a Kloo man, who also related the five next and that on page
86. A long section was added by Walter McGregor, who belonged to the
people of the west-coast town of Kaisun, and fragments were contributed
by Abraham, an old man of Kloo, by Tom Stevens, chief of
Those-born-at-House-point, the ancient people of Rose spit, and by Job
Moody, a man of the Witch people of Cumshewa and father of my
interpreter. A second version is appended. This was obtained in English
by Prof. Franz Boas from Charlie Edenshaw, chief of the great Masset
family Stᴀ′stas. He spent his earlier years at Skidegate, so I am not
certain whether it is more like the story as told at Skidegate or as
told at Masset. I am inclined to think, however, that it approaches the
form in which it was told by the people of Rose spit. While at Masset I
secured several additional texts bearing on events in the life of
Raven, some of them differing considerably from the above. An abstract
of these texts will be found on pages 207–211 of volume V, part 1, of
the Memoirs of the Jesup North Pacific Expedition. On pages 233–238 of
the same memoir will be found two sections of the story obtained from
two old Kaigani. They probably contain much of the Tlingit Raven story.
Finally, it must be stated that Raven is brought forward to explain so
many local phenomena that an absolutely complete Raven story is neither
practicable nor necessary.

A-SLENDER-ONE-WHO-WAS-GIVEN-AWAY

[Told by John Sky of Those-born-at-Skedans]

Once there was a chief’s child, they say, a girl, for whom they often
hung out hawk down on the end of a pole. [279] Her father loved her.
She had two brothers; one was large and the other had just begun
growing.

Once people came in front of her father’s town in ten canoes, danced
while coming and stopped in front of the town. Then one of her father’s
slaves inquired: “What are these come for?” “They are come to get the
chief’s child.” And when they said “The woman refuses,” they went away
weeping.

The next day others came dancing on ten canoes. Then again they asked:
“What are these come for?” “They are come to get the chief’s daughter.”
And those, too, they refused, and they went weeping away.

Now, the day after a certain one in a hair-seal canoe, [280] wearing a
broad hat, stood there early in the morning. He had a surf-bird for a
hat. After they had looked at him in his hair-seal canoe for a while,
they asked him: “Why does the canoe come?” He said nothing. They did
not want him. They said to him: “The woman refuses.” A round white
thing was on top of his hat. This was a foamy wave. The foam was
turning round and round rapidly. As soon as they had refused him the
earth changed. Out of the earth water boiled up. Then, when this island
was half covered, the frightened town people thought of giving the
woman up. She had ten servants, they say. And they dressed up one of
these just like her. And they painted her. And they put red cirrus
clouds on her and two clear-sky blankets [281] and sent her down to the
chief. Then he absolutely refused her. He would take none but the
chief’s child. They dressed up still another [slave] with dark mottled
clouds which lie seaward, and they put two marten-skin blankets on her
and had her go down. Her, too, he refused. He refused all ten in the
same way.

Now, all of the town people with their children had gone into her
father’s house. Then they all cried, and, without painting her, let her
go. And the ten servants all went with her. When she stood near the
salt water the canoe came quickly to her of itself. [Then the stranger
gave them his father’s hat covered with surf-birds (tcꜝîgᴀ′ldᴀx̣uañ),
which would keep flying out from it and back again.] Now, when she got
in, the ten servants got in with her. What caused the canoe to move
could not be seen. When the chief’s child had got in they discovered
him floating at the place where he had been before.

And they made holes in the front of the whole house by pulling off
planks. Through these they were looking to see which way his canoe
went. After they had looked for a while [it vanished and] they did not
see in which direction. And they did not see that it had sunk. And the
direction in which the chief’s daughter had vanished was unknown.

At times her father turned to the wall and cried, cried, cried. And her
mother turned to the wall and cried, cried, cried. One day he stopped
crying and said to his head slave: [282] “Find out whither my child
went.” “Wait, I will find out the proper time to go. I will go to see
whither your [child] went.”

One morning, as day began to break and when it was a propitious day for
him, he started the fire, and, while the people of the house whom he
feared to have see him, slept, he took a bath. Now after his skin
became dry he turned toward the wall and brought out the tackle he used
for fishing. He untied it, and he took out blue hellebore, and he put
it into the fire. And after he had watched it burn a while, he took it
out of the fire, and he rubbed it on the stone floor-planks and made a
mark with it on his face.

Then he got ready to start. He was going to search for the chief’s
child. The chief’s child’s mother was with him.

And he was a good hunter. He had a sea-otter spear. When he pushed off
he threw the sea-otter spear into the water, and, throwing its tail
about, it went along forming ripples in its passage, and he went with
it.

By and by the canoe stuck. The same thing happened to the sea-otter
spear, they say. Then he pulled the canoe ashore. The chief’s wife got
off, and he turned the canoe over. Long seaweeds were growing on it.
These were the things that stopped the canoe. He had been moving along
for a whole year. Then he took off his cape and rubbed it on the bottom
of the canoe and on the chief’s wife. And he rubbed it on himself as
well and became clean.

Again he shoved off the canoe. Then he threw the sea-otter spear into
the water again, and it moved on anew. He followed it. After he had
gone on, on, on, on for a long while, the canoe again stuck. Then he
pulled the canoe ashore still again. And he turned it over again. [A
kind of] long seaweed had grown on it, and on the chief’s wife, too,
and on himself. Then, as before, he took the cape off. And he rubbed it
on the canoe and on the chief’s wife as well. Then he rubbed it also on
himself. And after they had become clean he launched the canoe again.
Again he threw the sea-otter spear in, and again they followed it.
After he had been towed along by it for a while he came to floating
charcoal. There was no way for him to pass through this, they say. He
had brought along his fishing-tackle box, and he looked into it. And in
it he used to keep the [old spruce roots] taken off when he repaired
his halibut hooks. When he put these roots into the water, [the
charcoal] divided, and he was towed through. Not far away the canoe
came to another place where it (the passage) had closed together. And
when he put some [roots] into the water, as before, that also parted.

Then he was towed out of it and was brought to the edge of the sky.
Now, after it had shut together four times, he braced the spear under
it. [283] He went under. Then he pulled his spear out and put it into
the canoe. He took the paddle and began paddling.

By and by he could see the smoke of a great town. And he pulled the
canoe ashore some distance to one side of the town, they say. After he
had turned the canoe over he made the chief’s wife sit under it. Then
he walked to the town. When he came to the end of the town it was low
tide. A certain woman, with her infant on her back, had come down to
the uncovered beach. She held a basket in her hand, and she had a
digging stick and moved it before her as if hunting for something.
While putting something into the basket she looked up to where he was
seated. And, after she had looked for a while, she did the same thing
again. And, after she had rolled away the stones, she put sea cucumbers
into the basket. That was Property-woman. [284]

When she again fastened her eyes on the place where he sat, she said:
“I know you.” And then he stood up. And he went down on the beach and
stood near her. Then she said to him: “Do you travel hither expecting
to see the chief’s child?” He said “Yes.” “You see this town. He
thought grease into his son’s wife’s mind [285] because he gave away
his father’s hat as soon as he married the chief’s child. [286] She is
lying over there in a cave. When you have entered pass along by the
right side of the chief’s house and go behind the screen. There you
will hear news.”

Then he started away from Property-woman and went into the cave to the
chief’s child. And as she lay there she was winking her eyes. He took
his coat off and rubbed it upon her. And he tried to make her sit up.
In vain. And he became angry because he was unsuccessful. And, since he
could not succeed, he started off.

He put on his two yellow-cedar blankets and walked about among them
(the people). And they did not see him. Then he went into the chief’s
house and to the right. It had ten tiers of retaining planks. On the
upper one, in the middle of the sides, one sat weaving a chief’s
dancing-blanket. Then from the blanket she was weaving something said:
“To-morrow, too, one of my eyes [will still be] unfinished,
unfinished.” [287]

Then, contrary to the expectations of those in the house, he went round
behind the screen and a wonderful sight met his eyes, they say. A large
lake with several gravel points running into it lay there. The points
were red with cranberries. Canoe songs [288] resounded across it. Near
the stream which flowed out of this large lake they had a fire for
[drinking] salt water. [289]

Then some people came in from picking berries. As she walked past the
last one snuffed with her nose. “I smell a human being” [she said]. And
he said to her, “Say! it is I you are speaking about.” “It was the
yellow cedar-bark blankets of the chief’s child’s ten servants whom
they ate, which I am wearing that I smelt.” That was Mink-woman.[289]

And now he turned himself toward the fire which they had made [to warm]
salt water. When he got near, one among those sitting there in a group
said: “What will happen when they (her family) look for the chief’s
daughter?” “Why, what are you saying? When they look for the chief’s
child and return his father’s hat which he (the son) gave away, he (the
father) will make her sit down (i.e., restore her).”

After he had heard all the news he turned round. He remembered the
chief’s wife, ran back to the canoe and turned it over, but only the
chief’s wife’s bones lay there. Then he drew his coat off and rubbed it
upon her, and she awoke as if from sleep. She had been perspiring. He
put his arm into the canoe and pulled it into the water. After he had
let the chief’s wife in he came to the village. He tied her into the
canoe. He tied himself in the same way as the chief’s wife. He tied
himself as Property-woman had told him to do. They were there tied in
front of the chief’s house. As they floated there one came out of the
chief’s house and said: “Wait; they want the chief’s wife to remain
there. They are going to dance near by.” After she had remained there
for a while a thunderbolt [appeared to] drop in the house, they say.

By and by feathers came out of the smoke hole in a point. After it rose
into the air it broke off. Then it came to them in a point and struck
them, and they both forgot themselves.

They came to themselves lying on the retaining timbers. And then he
untied himself and the chief’s wife as well. When he could walk he
untied her. Her son-in-law sat opposite the door, and they spread out
mats for her below. Then they came down and sat in the middle of the
side. [290] Then one brought food in a small basket. In it were large
clam shells, small clam shells, and two mussel shells. They gave some
to the chief’s wife. They let her eat. After different kinds of food
had been brought out and eaten and all was gone, they brought a basket
to the fire, poured water into it, and put stones into the fire. When
these were red-hot they put them into the basket with wooden tongs.

It boiled. Then the chief said something to a youth who was walking
around the basket. Then he went into a storeroom in one corner and
brought out a whale on the end of a sharpened stick. He put it into the
basket. Now, when he had tried it with a stick and it had become soft,
he put the whale into a dish the shape of a chiton and laid it down
before them.

Now he again said something, and he (the youth) gave her old clam
shells to drink the soup out of. She was unable to drink with these.
Now she got her own basket and took out two large clam shells and two
mussel shells, whereupon the people all stopped in a moment as when
something is dropped. [291] And the chief, too, looked at nothing but
those mussel shells. When his eyes were fastened upon them she noticed
it and stopped.

Then she handed the shells to her husband’s slave and had him give them
to her son-in-law. He made a place for them [on his blanket]. Now,
after he had looked at them for a while, he said something, whereupon
they went to him to get them and put them away behind the screen.

In the evening those in the house went to sleep, and they (the
visitors) also went to sleep.

When day broke a young hair seal was crying in the corner of the house,
they say. At daylight they started off by canoe.

Now the canoe lay on top of the retaining planks. There he fastened the
chief’s wife, and he fastened himself in the stern. The thunderbolt
dropped behind the screens which pointed toward each other. When the
feathers came out from it in a point toward the fire and struck them
they forgot themselves. When they came to themselves they were on the
ocean.

Now he untied himself, went to the chief’s wife, and untied her. And
when they went off it was the middle of summer when the young hair seal
cry. He picked up his paddle and started paddling. After he had made
two strokes he reached his master’s town.

The chief’s wife went in and sat down. She related to her husband how
his daughter was situated. Then the slave also went to his master and
told him what those thought who had had a fire for salt water. He
repeated what they said to him word for word.

At once he spoke to the one who had charge of the fire. Two persons
went through the town summoning the people. Immediately they entered.
The house was full. Then he opened supplies of good food. He fed them.
He fed them all. When the food was all gone he told the town people
what he had in mind. He told the town people that he was going to look
for his daughter. All were well pleased. He told all the chiefs to
start in ten canoes. They agreed.

But the next morning his oldest boy had disappeared. When they began to
get ready the next day the youngest also was gone.

For the chief and the chief’s wife each they drew the figures of
cumulus clouds upon ten clam shells. As many mussel shells were inside
of these. He had ten drawn for the elder [son] and he had ten drawn for
the younger. The town people who were going away all gathered ten
apiece [for the men] and five apiece for the women. And after they had
got through gathering them they waited for the two sons who had gone
off to marry. They got tired of waiting for them because they wanted to
restore their sister. The town people had everything ready and were
awaiting them.

The elder got home at midday. His hair was fastened with cedar limbs.
“Mother, I have brought a wife to you. She stands outside. Go out and
get her.” So he spoke to his mother: “Oh! my child has come.” She
looked outside, and a woman stood there having curly hair parted and
large eyes. This was Mouse-woman.

After the youngest had been away for a while, he, too, came back at
midday. He came in, his hair fastened with a small fern. Hai hi hi hi
hi⁺⁺⁺. [292] “Mother, I bring a wife to you. She stands outside. Go out
and get her.” A wonderful person stood there. She was too powerful to
look at. Something short with curly hair and a copper blanket [stood
there]. “Chief-woman, come in.” She did not wish to enter. “She does
not wish to come in. She positively refuses, my child; your wife
positively refuses.” “Why! she goes by contraries,” he said to her as
he stood up. He went out to his wife, came in with her, and sat down.

Next day, very early, they went off. The town people all started out
together upon the ocean. The elder son’s wife sat up on one of the
seats, and the younger one’s wife concealed herself inside. She (the
former) sat up high to look after those who were starting off. She
always kept her small wooden box with her wherever she turned. When
they were all afloat she hunted in it and took out a bone awl. And she
put it into the water. The water rushed aside as it cut through. In
behind it they placed the canoe. The bone awl began to tow them along.

After they had been towed along, along, along, along, along for a
while, they came in sight of a broad band of smoke from a town. Some
distance from the town the elder brother’s wife told them all to land.
She talked to them. The elder brother had married Mouse-woman so that
they might follow her directions.

They stopped at this place, and she had them cut long sticks. They got
two poles at this place. The younger brother’s wife hid herself, but
the elder brother’s wife commanded the voyagers. The ten canoes were
still, and along the front of the bows and midway of the canoes they
put the sticks. They fastened them to thwarts by winding ropes around
them. [293] That was finished. Then they started for the front of the
town.

They stopped in front of the chief’s house, and one came out of the
chief’s house. “Wait, they direct you to remain still. They are going
to dance in front of you.” After they had remained there for a while,
they forgot themselves. Then they came to themselves lying on top of
the retaining planks. In the place where they woke up they untied
themselves. They also untied the poles that had been fastened upon the
canoes.

On top of the retaining planks they spread out mats. There were crowds
of people there on each side on the ten retaining planks. The chief’s
child was not there, the one they came after. Only her husband sat
there. Then they spread out two mats in front of the place where he
sat. In front of him the ten canoe loads of people laid their clam
shells. They filled the house up to the very roof. Now they laid the
hat on top of all. They gave it back to him.

“Come! send for my father. Tell him to hurry.” Then a youth started on
the run. “Is he coming?” “He is close by.” Whiu-u-u-u (sound of wind).
The house moved. The earth, too, shook. Of all the visitors who sat in
circles not one looked up. But, while they hung their heads, the
younger brother’s wife raised hers up. Then she looked toward the rear
of the house and toward the door. “Hold up your heads. Have you, also,
no power?” she said.

By and by the house shook again, and the ground with it. X̣u-u-u. The
people in the house again hung their heads. Now she said again “Hold
your heads up. Have you, too, no supernatural power?” At the same time
he came in and stood there. Something wonderful came in and stood
there. His large eyelids were too powerful to look at. Where he placed
his foot he stood for awhile. When he took another step the earth and
the house shook. When he took another step and the house and the earth
shook, all of the people hung their heads; but she (the youngest’s
wife) said to them, “Hold your heads up.” When she said it louder the
supernatural power that had entered took hold of his head. “Stop!
mighty supernatural woman that you are.” After that he came in. Nothing
happened. [294] He sat down near his son.

But when he first came in and sat down he laid his hands at once on his
hat.

With his father’s staff he divided the clam shells. He kept the smaller
part for himself. He made his father’s part large. “Did you send for
your wife, chief, my son?” “No, indeed; I have been waiting for you.”
“Send someone for your wife, chief, my son.” Then a youth went to call
her. “Is she coming?” “Yes; she approaches.” By and by the one whom
they were after came in from the cave where she had lain, and stood
there. But she went to her mother first. She did not go down to her
husband.

Then his father began to dance. After he had done so for a while, he
fell down. At once he broke in two in the middle. Out of his buttocks
feathers blew, and out of his trunk as well. One of the servants stood
up out of his buttocks, one out of his trunk, another out of his
buttocks, another out of his trunk. All ten whom he had eaten he
restored. [295] That was why he danced. On account of the hat he had
devoured the servants. He had put grease, too, into the mind of the
chief’s daughter by thinking. On account of the hat they put her in the
cave. By and by he came together. He stopped dancing. He sat down.

Now they put more wood on the fire, made them sit down in a circle, and
began to give them something to eat. The feast went on even until
midnight, when they stopped. They stopped. They went to bed.

When day began to break the young hair seals cried in the very place
where they had cried before. Then they prepared to start from the top
of the retaining timbers, where their canoes were lying.

Then her father-in-law called her. “Noble woman, [296] wait until I
give you directions.” And he whispered to her. He gave her directions
as she sat near him. “Chief-woman, I will come forth from your womb. Do
not be afraid of me.” And to her he gave a round plate of copper, to
which some strings and a chain were fastened. It was named X̣īłūtꜝā′ła
(Property chain (?)). “Have Master Carpenter make my cradle, chief’s
daughter. Let lofty cumulus clouds be around the upper edges,
chief-woman, and around its lower edges short ones. In those days human
servants (i.e., human beings) will gather food through me. When they
see me sitting in the morning the surface birds will gather food while
I am governing the weather (i.e., while I am in sight).” [297]

Her parents (“fathers”) were waiting for her on top of the retaining
timbers, but, below, her father-in-law was giving her directions, to
which she was listening. After he had ceased talking, she got into the
canoe with her father. They fastened the canoes to each other; they all
fastened themselves. After the chief’s child got in, all forgot
themselves. When they came to, they were afloat upon the ocean.

At once they started off. In a short time he came to his village. After
it had lain still for a long time the chief’s daughter became pregnant.
When she began to labor they made a house for her outside. They drove
in a stake, had her take hold of it, and went in. Now he came forth,
and, when she looked at him, she saw something wonderful. Something
flat stuck out from his eyelids. She rose quickly and ran away from him
in fright. “Awaiyā′,” she said, and the town was nearly overturned.

Then she quickly turned back toward him, laid her hands upon him, and
exclaimed as she picked him up: “Oh! my grandfather, it is I.” The town
was as still as when something is suddenly thrown down. She brought him
to the house. Her father put hot stones into a urinal he owned, and
they washed him. [298]

As soon as they went out for [Master Carpenter], he came on the run. He
held in his hand what he had taken off (i.e., cut out) [299] in the
woods. As soon as he came in he put the drawing on it, as the chief’s
daughter told him. He pictured the clouds upon it. There were two rows
of them. He made holes in the cradle for fastening the rope alongside
of his legs.

Then they put him in. They brought out two sky blankets and wrapped
them round him in the cradle. After that was done they launched the
canoe. Five persons and the chief’s daughter went with her son. Then
they started seaward. They went, they went, they went. When they found
by looking about that they were midway between the Haida country and
the mainland they let him down into the water. When they let him go he
turned around to the right four times and became like something flat
thrown down. Then they went away from him, and settled down at the
place where they had been before.

[He was the one who has his place in the middle of the sea. Sometimes
when sickness was about to break out they saw him. Nᴀñʟ̣da′ sʟas [300]
was a reef.]

[What follows is really a second story, but it was told as part of the
same. Its true name is said to be
“He-who-had-Panther-woman-for-his-mother.”]

Here on the Nass lay the town of Gu′nwa. Four slaves of the owner of
the town came down [the inlet] after wood. They cut the wood at a sandy
beach below the town and saw young cedars. They found them for the
chief’s wife. They did not believe their eyes [for joy at finding them
growing so conveniently to the water]. They finished cutting the wood,
loaded it on their canoe, and went up with the tide. At evening they
got back. The town people brought in the wood, and he (the chief)
called them in.

Then, after they had given away food for a while, he reported that they
had seen young cedars. At once the chief’s wife planned to go for the
bark. They went to sleep, and early in the morning she had her
husband’s canoe brought out. People of the town, the chief’s daughters
and young men, all went with her. At once they floated down with the
current. Hu hu hu hu hu, much food,—cranberries and salmon,—[they took
with them]. Then they went down.

When they landed by the young cedars all the women pulled off and
dragged down [the bark] from those [trees] near by. They pulled it off
and dragged it out to her. When they had taken all from those near at
hand they became scattered.

She (the chief’s wife) sat with her back to the sunshine, pulling cedar
bark apart. She was not in the habit of eating much. Her fingers were
slender. She did not care for food.

After the sounds of the voices of women and men had died away inland a
person wearing a bearskin blanket with the hair side out came and stood
near her. He held something like a pole. It had a sharp point. It was
half red, half blue. He was looking at the chief’s wife, but she did
not even glance toward him. He asked the chief’s wife: “How do you act
when your husband calls the people [for a feast]?” “When my husband
calls the people, I empty the whole dish placed in front of the one
sitting next to me into my mouth.”

She had children. One of the two boys she had could not creep.

“How do you act when your husband calls the people again?” “As soon as
my husband calls the people I put food into the dishes and, bending
down, eat out of them.” “How do you act when your husband comes in from
fishing?” “I go down, pull up my dress, swim out to him, and swallow
the two spring salmon which are on top.”

He drove the thing he had in his hand into her forehead, and, when it
stuck out at the back of her head and he had raised her arm, all of her
flesh dropped off. Then he sat down and entered it (her skin). And he
picked up her flesh and buried it in the sand at the foot of the tree.
After he had seated herself in the place of the chief’s wife, they came
down to her in crowds with the cedar bark.

All of them pulled their cedar bark apart. Among the crowds of people
that were there the chief woman did it. “Woman, I am hungry.” “Well,
there is a piece of white food in [my box].” “In mine, too.” “In mine,
too.” This [they said] because they wanted to have her eat.

The one who was quickest broke up the piece of food and placed it in
front of her. She ate all of the little they gave her. While she was
doing it, at which they were very much pleased, they started out. Later
than the usual time for going to sleep they reached home. They
explained that they had started back in the night because the chief’s
wife had begun to eat.

The chief commanded wood to be put on the fire. Then he called the
people. One of her children had nearly cried itself to death when she
reached home. When they handed it to her she pulled her teats out and
put one into her child’s mouth, but it ran away from her. It was
sucking a man. That is why it ran off crying.

The town people came in and sat down in a circle. After they had
roasted the salmon, had broken it up into small pieces, and had placed
some in a dish in front of the one sitting next to her she emptied it
all [into her mouth]. She did not chew it. When she emptied it into her
mouth the town people looked at her instead of eating. They were
astonished at the way in which she handled the food. But it was the
chief’s wife [they thought].

Next day his wife was again hungry, and again he called the people.
While they were in astonishment at her [actions], the elder brother
carried his younger brother along in front of the town. Both went
crying along. He called the people. Then they let her pour the berries
into a dish. To their surprise instead of doing so she bent over the
tray. The youths came back in a crowd with the empty trays. They were
astonished at what she did. It was not the chief’s wife that they saw.

Next day, very early, he (the elder brother) launched one of his
father’s canoes and put his younger brother in the bow. He paddled off
aimlessly out of Nass inlet, away from the town of Gu′nwa. After he had
gone down with the tide for a while a woman leaned halfway out from a
certain house and said: “Come hither.” The house had a front sewed
together with cedar limbs. [301] It was painted.

Then he directed his course toward it. After he had landed she said to
him: “Stop with me. To-morrow you shall go on.” She spread out mats
woven in many colors for them. The chief-woman sat on one side, the
elder brother next to her, and the younger lay on the other side of
him. Then she said to him: “Let your younger brother sit next to me.”
He picked him up and made him sit next to her.

For a long time he had had nothing to eat, since the time when they
were astonished at the actions of his mother. He was going to eat for
the first time with this woman. She turned round. Then she looked into
her box, took a dish out of it with the carving of a mouse on it, and
placed before him a single piece of salmon.

He bent down his head and thought: “After I have gone hungry for so
long this is very little for me to eat. What part will my brother eat?”
She was looking at his face and said to him: “Why, just as it is, the
supernatural beings are never able to pick it up and eat it.” He picked
it up, and his younger brother also picked it up. Yet it was still
there. After they had eaten it for a while they had enough and put [the
dish] back.

After the dry fish was finished she put down a cranberry for them as
well. As soon as he thought about that, too, she looked into his face
again and said to him: “Eat it. The supernatural beings are unable to
consume it.” Then he picked it up with a spoon and ate it. When they
were filled she put it back.

After it became dark she spread out the mat. There the chief-woman lay
down. The elder brother was going to lie next to her, but she said:
“Lay your younger brother next me.” He picked him up and laid him next
her. As soon as he laid him down he lay as still as one killed by a
club. For the first time after he had cried so long he slept.

While he (the elder brother) was asleep he heard a woman laugh, and it
awoke him. To his surprise his younger brother was playing with the
chief-woman. When his younger brother did a certain thing to the chief
woman [she exclaimed]: “Yu-ī′, now see how
He-who-came-to-have-Panther-woman-for-his-mother plays with me.” As
soon as the elder brother understood this he began to cry [from
jealousy]. At the same time day broke.

At daybreak he began to get ready to go somewhere without knowing
whither. Then she made him sit down. “Stop! let me tell you something.”
She brought her box out to the fire, took something blue out of it, and
bit off part for him. “Now, my grandson, if anything has too much power
for you, swallow this and spit it upon yourself.” Then she said to him:
“Right down the inlet lives the one whom you came to see, the one for
whose daughter you came. But your younger brother shall remain with me,
and after a while I will marry him.”

Then he went down with the current alone. He was expecting to meet
Sqä′g̣ał’s daughter. There lay the large town in which lived the woman
he came to marry. After he had walked about in the town for a while it
became dark. Then he entered Sqä′g̣ał’s house. He went in and sat down
close to the door. The chief’s child sat between the screens at the
rear of the house. Around her walked some women with their hair stuck
together in bunches. Her father set them to watch her so that she might
do nothing foolish. When day began to break, instead of going in to
her, he went outside.

He went round the front of the house and followed a narrow trail. At an
open place near water holes human bones were piled up, and a bull pine
stood there. In the branches of this he sat down. After he had been
sitting there for some time red spots from the rising sun appeared on
the open ground. Then the chief’s child came thither. The servant who
came in advance had a bone stuck in her nose. [302] She had a crooked
war club. The one who came behind was dressed in the same way. The
leader had a human scalp in her hands. Their hair was stuck together in
bunches. She was a Tlingit woman. The one behind was a Bellabella.
[303]

She sat down, untied her blanket, and was naked. Then she went into the
water, turned round four times, and came out. Then the Tlingit woman
rubbed her back. The Bellabella woman, too, rubbed her breast. After
they had finished rubbing her she went into the water a second time.
After she had turned round to the right she sat down on dry ground and
turned her back to the sunshine.

When her skin had begun to dry he came out and seized her. The moment
that he seized her he quickly touched noses. [304] One servant picked
up her weapons with the scalp, ready to strike him, and the other one,
too, was ready to strike him with the bone club. But she stopped them.
“Do not kill him. I will marry him.” The human bones lying around
belonged to those who, having become fascinated at the sight of her,
had seized her, and had presently been killed by the servants.

At the same place, beside the bull pine, they lay with each other. The
Tlingit woman sat down at her feet. The Kwakiutl woman sat at her head.
There they kept looking at her. When the sun was set all four went
home. Then she entered her father’s house. As she went in she concealed
her husband under her blankets. Her father had his eyes fixed upon her
and [said]: “My child, what makes you lame?” “Father, a shell made my
foot sore by cutting into it.” Then they went in together behind the
screens.

And in the evening the chief’s child lay behind the screens. Then he
lay with her, and he (her father) heard someone talking with his
daughter in the night. When day broke the chief commanded them to put
wood on the fire, and two slaves put wood on the fire. After it had
begun to burn up he said: “Come! look to see who is talking with my
child.” Then a young man went thither and said: “Someone is lying here
with her.” And her father said: “Alas! I wonder what roaming
supernatural being it is! Perhaps it is
‘He-who-had-Panther-woman-for-his-mother,’ whom I wanted my child to
marry.” “He says he is the one, father [said his daughter].”

Then he spread out a mat next to himself and said: “My child, come and
sit down near the fire with your husband.” Shortly she came down and
sat there with him. They put four hard stones into the fire. When they
became red-hot he put them into a dish standing near the wall with the
tongs. Then he had it set before his son-in-law. A spoon made out of
white rock was stuck into it. She was crying. “Hᴀ hᴀ hᴀ!” she wept, “he
is going to do again as he always does when I try to get married. That
is how he kills them.” Then he said to his wife, “Do not utter a word.”

Now he took the spoon, picked up one of the red-hot stones and
swallowed it. His insides were not affected. He handled all four in the
same way. He finished with them.

This was because his supernatural power was strong. If his supernatural
power had been weak, he would have been killed. Because his
supernatural power was strong he let him marry his daughter.

While he was living with this woman he and his younger brother, who had
become the husband of Mouse-woman, forgot how their mother had begun to
act strangely.

One day he lay abed a long time. He lay until evening. He was there
when they went to sleep. Next day he again lay abed. Again he was there
till they went to sleep. He lay abed two days. “My child” [said his
father-in-law], “why is your husband feeling badly?” She said: “I do
not know.” Then she went over to her husband, sat down at the head of
his bed, and talked a while to him. Then she said to her father: “He
has suddenly become desirous to see his younger brother, whom he left
just above here.” “Now, chief-woman, go with your husband to the common
canoe I own over there in the woods.”

And they went thither. To their surprise they did not find the canoe.
Only the bones of a whale lay there among the salmon-berry bushes. Its
tail bones lay [with the rest]. Then they returned and she said to her
father: “Father, we could not find it. Only a whale’s head lies there.”
Then he said to her: “Chief-woman, my daughter, that was it. Say to it
‘Go seaward, father’s canoe.’”

When she went back to it with her husband she kicked it. “Go seaward,
father’s canoe,” she said to it. Now a whale canoe floated upon the
water. The lines cut on the edges [305] were pictures of geese, which
almost moved their wings. And they carried their stuff down to it. The
canoe was all filled with good food, with cranberries, berries in
cakes, soapberries, and the fat of all kinds of animals, grizzly-bear
fat, mountain-goat fat, deer fat, ground-hog fat, beaver fat—the fat
parts of all mainland animals; and he got into the canoe and pressed it
down with his feet toward the bow. When the canoe was nearly full those
who were loading it went up to the house and laid pieces of whale meat,
with most of the grease taken out, in a basket. When it was full they
took it down. And they laid it on the top.

When they were ready to start, her father came out; [he said]: “My
child, when the creatures seated on both sides call throw cranberries
into their mouths. When they become hungry they keep calling.”

As soon as they moved their wings the canoe started. While they did so
the canoe went along. By and by, when his brother’s wife’s house came
in sight, they shoved off Mouse-woman’s canoe also. They also loaded
her’s with good food. When it was filled they pressed it toward the bow
with their feet. By and by it was filled, and they started off
together.

As soon as the geese along the edges of the elder brother’s canoe began
to call he took out cranberries and put them into their mouths. Along
the edges of the younger one’s canoe sat rows of small human figures.
All had small painted paddles in their hands. With these they paddled.
As soon as they began to move their lips as if hungry he fed them.

When they came near to the place where they had gone to get cedar bark,
the younger brother’s wife and the elder brother’s wife sat upright.
And they said: “Move shoreward.” Now they got off there. They had
sticks in their hands, and they hunted in the sand with them from the
sea inland. By and by they dug out the bones of a human being in front
of a tree at the edges of the grass. The canoes floated on the water in
front of them. Their husbands were looking at them.

Mouse-woman took out her box. Sqäg̣ał’s daughter, too, took out her box.
Sqäg̣ał’s daughter brought out of her box a mat with edges like clouds.
Mouse-woman took out something from her box also and bit off a part.
Now they put the mat over her and began to rattle her bones under it.
Underneath this Mouse-woman spit many times. Then they (i.e.,
Mouse-woman) told Sqäg̣ał’s daughter to hurry: “Quick, hasten your mind,
noble woman.” Then she, too, said: “It is [for you to do so], noble
woman. You had better hurry yourself; it is getting late.” Then she
pulled off the mat. Ah! their mother-in-law got up. He looked at his
mother; both [boys], in fact, [did so].

They had her get into the canoe of the younger and went up with the
tide to Gunwa, their father’s town. The younger brother’s wife hid her
mother-in-law. They were anxious to see how their [supposed] mother
would act when they arrived. When they got near the town, the wife of
the younger ordered the canoes to be brought close together. The town
was thrown into commotion. They reported to each other that the chief’s
son and his younger brother, who had gone away, had both married. The
people who came down to meet them were like warriors going to fight. In
front came his mother putting her belt on as she ran to carry up the
things. She acted differently from the others.

Then the elder brother’s canoe landed first, and Sqäg̣ał’s daughter
stood near the basket. “Come hither, woman. Carry up my basket.” Then
she went to it and was going to carry it with the strings around her
head. Sqäg̣ał’s daughter prevented her. She wished her to carry it the
right way [with the straps around her breast]. When she carried it, the
weight made her stagger as she went up. She got into the house with it.
How huge it was! Afterward they at once carried up the other things.

After they had pulled up the canoe, the younger one’s canoe also came
to the shore. A big basket was in it, the strings on which were just
like a knife. Mouse-woman stood near it. Then she called her
mother-in-law from the place where she was carrying things up. “Come
hither, woman. Carry up my basket.” Then her mother-in-law came to her,
and was about to put the basket strings around her head. But [the
other] forbade her. And she did as she was told.

When she started to carry it up the strings cut her head off. Her head
lay at some distance. At once Mouse-woman took a whetstone out of her
box, quickly got ashore, and put it between her head and her trunk,
which were drawing together. After she had ground herself to pieces
foam was piled up on either side.

Now she let out her mother-in-law. At that time they came down in a
crowd and got her. They did it because they were glad to see her. To
kill her mother-in-law was the purpose for which Mouse-woman let
herself marry the boy. A crowd of people carried the property up. Then
she said to her husband: “Leave me. I married you to restore your
mother to life.” At once she pushed the canoe off and vanished
downstream with the current. There was no trace of her left.

After that the elder brother’s wife lived as a chief’s wife. Then she
became pregnant, Sqäg̣ał’s daughter did. She bore a boy. Again she was
pregnant. She bore another boy. [She bore seven boys.] There was one
girl.

Sqäg̣ał’s children made their town at Qꜝadō′, opposite Metlakahtla.
Their mother and their sister lived with them. All eight went out to a
beaver pond to hunt. When they had at length come to the lake, and had
made a hole in one end of the dam, a stick was carried into the
shoulder of the eldest by the force of the current. He died there.

Then they went away. And at midnight they came behind the house. Then
they sent out the youngest and gave him the following directions:
“Speak to our mother. And also watch your elder brother’s wife. She
must be unfaithful to him. She must be going with another man. That is
why our brother is [dead].”

He went off, entered his mother’s side of the house, laid his hand on
his mother’s head, and said to his mother: “The beaver dam drifted down
upon my elder brother. One piece drifted into his neck. He dropped dead
without speaking a word.” Then she said: “Alas! my child.” “Stop! we do
not want him spoken of before the people. Do not say a word.”

When she had wakened the people in the house by her exclamation, they
asked her: “What made you say that?” and she said, “I dreamed of
something terrible. I dreamed that a beaver dam floated into my eldest
son and he dropped dead without saying a word. That was what made me
cry out.”

After he had lain flat on the floor near his mother, and midnight had
come, he heard some one talking with his elder brother’s wife. When it
was near daylight, they stopped whispering. Then he crept over to them.
And as the man slept he cut off his head.

After they had sat there in the woods for a while day came, and they
went home. They had a real human head in their hands. The youngest
brother put his head above the door. Out of it blood oozed in drops.

The chief’s son [in Metlakahtla] was lost, and they were looking for
him everywhere. They stopped inquiring for him. The town of Metlakahtla
lay there. By and by a north wind began to blow. The sea surface froze,
even to Qꜝadō′. They began to walk to and fro to each other on the ice.

Very early one morning a slave went to the town of Qꜝadō′ for live
coals. “Enter the middle house,” they said to him. And when he went in
blood dropped upon his feet. When he pushed the charcoal into the fire,
he turned his head around from looking at the side opposite the door.
Above the door, to his astonishment, he saw the head of the chief’s son
who had disappeared. He recognized him by the abalone-shell earrings he
wore.

He picked up the live coals and started away with them. When he came to
the ice he threw the coals away. Then he returned. Though he had looked
right at it, he did not believe himself. And he went in again, and
again he put the coals into the fire. After he had looked about the
house for a while he fastened his eyes upon it again. It was really the
chief’s son. Then he went away with the burning coals.

When he was halfway back he also threw those coals away. He thought: “I
must have been mistaken.” Then he went back again. He entered, and he
put [fresh charcoal] into the fire. And as soon as he had done so, he
looked. It was truly he. He saw with his eyes. Then he started off with
the burning coals.

Just outside he threw them away. At once he ran off shouting. “The head
of the chief’s son who disappeared forever is stuck up in this house,”
he shouted out as he ran. As soon as they heard his voice from the town
they did not delay. They put on their armor, shields, helmets. And they
ran to fight with war spears and bows and arrows. At once they fought
with Sqäg̣ał’s children.

She and her mother were the only ones from among her kindred who were
saved. Her brothers, however, they destroyed. They (the two women) came
to live in a branch house in front of a hill behind the town. She lived
there some time with her daughter. Every evening she cried. They went
to bed, and they continued to lie there.

One day she offered her daughter in marriage: “Djīnâ′-â-â, nałgū-ū-ūs
Ga′oax (Tsimshian words).” [306] A large creature came running in at
the side toward the door. “I will marry your daughter.” “What will you
do when you marry my daughter?” “Oh, bother! after I have married your
daughter I will come out at one end of the town and eat them all up
from the end. I will eat them all.” That was Grizzly-bear.

At once she said the same thing again: “Djīnâ′-â-â, djīnâ′-â-â
nałgū-ū-ūs Ga′oax.” Something with crooked legs came in. “I will marry
your daughter.” “After you have married my daughter what will you do
for us?” “I will tip the town over by digging it up with my teeth.”
That was Beaver.

“Djīnâ′-â-â, djīnâ′-â-â nałgū′-ū-ūs Ga′oax.” “What will you do after
you have married my daughter?” “I [will] run into the water at the end
of the town. Then they [will] take me into some canoe, and I [will]
make them quarrel. Then all the townspeople will kill each other.” That
was Deer.

Still another time [she cried]: “Djīnâ′-â-â, djīnâ′-â-â nałgū-ū-ūs
Ga′oax.” [307] Someone came in and stood there. He had a bow for a
staff. Feathers were around it in one place. He held arrows with it in
his hand. He had a quiver on his back. He had dancing leggings. He had
a gable-crowned hat. He did not say a word. “What are you going to do
if you marry my daughter?” He took a heavy step with his right foot.
The earth cracked. “Stop! stop! great chief, you are the one.” Then the
earth closed again. “Indeed, I thought that you had your daughter for
me.”

He took off his hat. He laid aside his quiver. He started off with only
two arrows and his bow. He rolled a grizzly bear down from a steep
place with his foot. There he also rolled down a deer and a beaver.
Again he started off. He brought a post out on his shoulder. He put it
into the ground, and without waiting, pulled it out. He went to the
other side and did the same thing there, also toward the door, and on
the other side. There he let it stay.

Again he went off. He brought out a wall post. In the rear of the house
he stuck it in, in the other corner, on the side toward the door, in
the corner opposite to that.

He went off. He brought out a stringer. He put it up and, after he had
moved it backward and forward a while, he took it over to the other
side. He put it up on the wall posts, too, and on the opposite side.
There he let it stay.

Again he went off. He brought a plank out on his shoulder. He set it up
on edge above the side opposite the door, and he rolled it over. By
doing this again and again he completed half [of the roof]. He did the
same to the other half of the roof. He filled up that, too.

Again he went away. He brought out a wall plank. He stood it up, shoved
it along, and one side of the front was filled. He treated the other
side and the side opposite the door in the same way. He treated both
sides of the house in the same way. [308]

The house was finished. He went away. He brought two white rocks. He
rubbed them against each other and laid them down under the smoke hole.
The fire burned continually. It was never extinguished.

After that his mother-in-law kept cutting up and bringing in mountain
goats and grizzly bears. Afterward she cooked them. He took his quiver
and his bow. He put on his hat, took up his wife, and went away with
her. He was the son of One-who-goes-along-above (i.e., the moon).

After he had lived with her in his father’s house for a while he had a
child by her. She bore a boy. Again she gave birth to a boy. [She gave
birth to eight.] Again she gave birth. She gave birth to [two] girls.
The eldest son was called “Puncher” (X̣ᴀtagī′a). [309] The youngest girl
was called “One-who-sucks-arrow-points-from-wounds.” The next one he
named “One-who-heals-the-place-where-the-arrows-strike.” His
grandfather called the eldest boy to him, took out his bones, and put
stones in in place of them. He filled up all parts of his body with
stones.

One day he gave ten slaves to the eldest. To the next he also gave ten
slaves. He gave ten apiece to all eight. He made a row of houses for
them, all sewed together with cedar limbs. On the house front of the
eldest he put the figure of a thunder-bird. On that of the next one he
put the figure of a sculpin. On that of the next he put the figure of a
rainbow. On that of the next he put the figure of a killer whale. On
that of the next he put the figure of a human being. On that of the
next one he figured stars. On that of the next he put the figure of a
cormorant. On that of the next he put the figure of a sea gull. To the
eldest brother he gave a spear box. Along with it he gave an arrow box.
He gave to all eight of them in the same way. Then he put two
marten-skin blankets around each of their two sisters.

He sat in front of his grandchildren’s town and called for them. Then
they picked up their weapons and practised fighting each other. By and
by one was shot. Then the elder sister went out and sucked the arrow
out of him. The younger sister went thither, spit on her palms, and
rubbed them on him. Immediately he was fighting among the ten. Both [of
the women] walked about among them. They tried particularly to shoot
them. Instead of penetrating, the weapons rebounded from the blankets.
That was why he gave the blankets to them. Thus they turned out good
[warriors], and he had them cease fighting.

One day he began to let his grandchildren’s town down. He pulled apart
the heavy floor planks, looked down, and saw the houses of Metlakahtla
and [the site of] Qꜝadō′ among human beings. At midnight he let down
the house of the eldest. When it struck the ground there was a sound of
rattling planks. From the town of Metlakahtla one cried “Wā-ā-ā-ā-ā,
ghosts are settling down”. So he heard some one cry. He let down two of
them. He let down three.

The youngest received the following directions from his grandfather:
“When you run away because they are too much for you put a wooden wedge
having a drawing on it into the fire for me. Say to it ‘Tell my
grandfather.’”

All that time the Metlakahtla people shouted “Wā-ā-ā-ā-ā, ghosts are
coming down.” Eight had come down. It was wonderful to see smoke
rolling from them in the daylight. In front of the town people walked
about in crowds. They wore feathers in their hair. They longed much to
see them. Then they sent a slave across in a canoe for live coals. They
told him to go into the middle house, which had the figure of a
thunder-bird on it.

He landed in front and shoved his coals into the fire. To his surprise
he recognized Ga′oax there cooking parts of an animal. It was she whose
sons they had killed. From rear to front gambling was in progress.
Those watching the gambling stood about in crowds. He looked on. She
(i.e., Ga′oax) threw a fat piece of meat to him [saying]: “Here is some
ghosts’ food for you to taste.”

He went out. Then he threw away the burning coals and paddled across.
He reached home, but instead of eating the fat he carried it up. He
entered his master’s house and said: “Say! did you kill Ga′oax?” At
once they called all the town people, and they questioned one another:
“Did you kill Ga′oax?” Some said “Yes;” some, “No.” Some thought that
she had got safely into the woods.

While they were still in the house one, full of mischief, [310] bit off
some of the mountain goat meat. They looked to see him drop dead where
he stood. Presently he said: “Why, it passed into me all right. All of
you taste it. Swallow it. This is human beings’ food.”

One among them said: “Well! let us gamble with them. Then you can see
whether Ga′oax got safely into the woods.” With that intention they
went to bed, and next day, early in the morning, the town chief
launched his canoe. The town, the chiefs and the middle-aged, all went.
They went across.

After they had landed there they went into the middle house, and those
who were gambling put away their gambling sticks. At once they began
gambling with these instead. The town chief started to gamble with the
elder brother. But Ga′oax spread out grizzly bear skins around the
inside of the house. She and the young people began to give them food.

The elder brother was left-handed. He had laid the gambling-sticks down
on that side. On the same side lay his bone club. After gambling had
gone on for some time he stopped the town chief, who was handling the
sticks. “You are cheating me” [he said]. And he replied: “No, indeed; I
am not cheating you.” In spite of that he insisted upon it for a long
time. After they had disputed for some time, the town chief threw fine
cedar bark into his face. Then he struck him on the head with his war
club. He killed him.

The house was in an uproar. They picked up their weapons, and the
Metlakahtla people as well. They began to fight. While the fighting
went on the two sisters walked about among them. Although they were
struck with the spears, the latter always broke upon them. After the
fight had gone on for a while one had an arrow point break off in him.
He was wounded badly. When he was about to lie down the elder sister
sucked his wound and sucked it out. Then the other sucked it, spit upon
her hand, and rubbed on the wound. Then he got up again and fought with
them.

The fight went on until the dawn of the next day, and continued then
and the day after. Now they began to drive the people of Qꜝadō′ back.
When that happened the youngest brother ran over to the house, drew
something upon a partly used wooden wedge, said to it: “Carry the news
to my grandfather,” and threw it into the fire. [311]

Then it at once came into the front part of the house and said: “Your
grandchildren are beginning to be hard pressed.” Now he looked down
between the floor planks. To his surprise his grandchildren, who were
fighting for revenge, were being driven back. The eldest brother was
naked. He fought among them with his fists. When he struck one, he did
not get up again. He looked down upon all this. He turned around, went
to get his small, square box and, when he had opened five boxes, one
within the other, he took from the last something [shaped like skeins
of yarn], covered with the sky and tied up with rope. After he had
looked down for a while, he threw it down upon the people of
Metlakahtla. Then their legs only were visible. At these they struck,
and they killed all. These were called Clouds-of-the-Killer. [312]

Although this is the second story of the Skedans series, it was the
first of them that I took down, my informant choosing to tell the Raven
story last, and it is the second Haida story recorded by me. In
consequence, the form in which it appears is rougher than that of most
of the others, and certain points will seem obscure at the first
reading. As noted in the text and translation, there are really two
stories combined under one head. To the first the name properly
belongs, and this may be a real Haida story, but the second,
“He-who-had-Panther-woman-for-his-mother,” is a well-known Tsimshian
tale. Nevertheless, my informant stoutly maintained that the story was
always told in this combined form. Probably, the common episode of the
marriage of two chiefs’ sons to women having supernatural power was the
occasion for placing them together. The name given for Panther-woman,
Sîmn’â′sᴀm, is Tsimshian.
