(5) Sn.4NG0. 

Shango, the god of thunder and lightning, is, next 
to Obatala, the most powerful god of the Yorubas ; he 
was the second to spring from the body of Yemaja. 
His name appears to bo derived from «/wh, " to. 
strike violently," and go, " to bewilder ; " and to have 
reference to peals of thunder, which are supposed to 
be produced by violent blows.* He has the epithet 
of Jakuta, "Hurler of stones," or "Fighter with 
stones " (ja, to hurl from aloft, or ^11, to fight, and 
ohda, stone) ; and stone implements, which have long 
ceased to be used in West Africa, are believed to be 
his thunderbolts. 

To wield the thunderbolt is certainly one of the 
proper functions of the sky-god, and the process by 
which he becomes deprived of it is not by any means 
clear. It does not appear to be the result of advanc- 
ing culture, for the Zeus of the Greeks and the Jupiter 
of the Romans, who had respectively the epithets 
Kerauneios a.n<i Tonans, retained it; as do the Nyan- 
kupon of the Tshis and the Nyonmo of the Gas ; 
while, like the Ewes and Yorubas, the Aryan Hindus 

* For the same notioa among tLe Tshis and GiU, > 
p. 36. 

' Note ftt. 

CHIEF GODS. 47 

made another god, namely, Indra, offspring of Dyaiis, 
wield the lightning. 

The notion we found amongst the Ewes that a bird- 
like creature was the animating entity of the thunder- 
stonn has no parallel here, and Shango is purely 
acthropomorphic. He dwells in the clouds in an 
immense brazen palace, where he maintains a large 
retinue and keeps a great number of horses ; for, 
besides being the thunder-god, he is also the god of 
the chase and of pillage.* From his palace, Shango 
hurls npon those who have offended him red-hot 
chains of iron, which are forged for him by his 
brother Ogun, god of the river Ogim, of iron and of 
(Far; but this, it should be observed, is seemingly a 
modern notion, and the red-hot chains furnished by 
Ogun have a suspicious resemblance to the thunder- 
bolts of Jupiter, forged by Vulcan. The Yoruba 
word for lightning is viava-maiia (ma-ina, a making 
of fire), and has no connection either with iron (inn) 
or a chain (ewon) ; while the name Jakuta shows that 
Shango is believed to hurl stones and not iron. The 
iron-chain notion, therefore, appears to have been 
borrowed from some foreign source, and, moreover, 
not to yet have made much progress. The Oni- 
Shango, or Priests of Shango,t in tbeir chants always 
speak of Shango as hurling stones ; and whenever a 
house is struck by lightning they rush in a body to 
tillage it and to find the stone, which, as they take 

• Hunting and tininder w 

ei-c likewise tli 

functions of the Azt<'c 

3, or godJcss, Mixcontl. 

(Nndaillac, 

"Prehistoric America," 

898.) 

f Oni, one who possesses- o 

r gets. 

48 THE YUUCIiA-Sl'EAKlNO PEOPLES. 

it with them secretly, they always succeed in doing. 
A chant of the Oni-Shango very commonly heard is, 
" Ob, Shango, thou art the master. Thou takest in 
thy hand thy fiery stones, to punish the guilty aud 
satisfy thine anger. Everything that they strike is 
tiestroyed. Their fire eats up the forest, the trees 
are broken down, aud all living creatures are slain; " 
and the lay-worshippers of Shango flock into the 
streets during a thunderstorm crying, " Shango, 
Shango, Great King ! Shango is the lord and master. 
In the storm he hurls his fiery stones against his 
enemies, and their track gleams in the midst of the 
darkness." "May Shango's stone strike you," is a 
very common imprecation. 

According to some natives, Oshumare, the Rainbow, 
is the servant of Shango, his office being to take up 
water from the earth to the palace in the clouds. He 
has a messenger named Ara, '* Thunder-clap," whom 
he sends out with a loud noise. A small bird called 
papagon is sacred to Shango, and his worshippers 
profess to be able to understand its cry. 

Shango married three of his sisters : Oya, the Niger ; 
Oshun, the river of the same name, which rises in 
Ijeaa and flows into the water-way between Lagos 
and the Lekki lagoon, near Emina; and Oba, also a 
river, which rises in Ibadan and flows into the Kradu 
Water. All three accompany their liusband when he 
goes out, Oya taking with her her messenger Af^e 
(the Wind, or Gale of AVind), and Oshun and Oba 
carrying his bow and sword. Shango's slave Birl 
(Darkness) goes in attendance. 

The image of Shango generally represents him as a 

VHIEl^ GODS. +9 

man standing, and is surrounded by images, smaller 
in size, of his three wives ; who are also represented as 
standing up, with the palms of their hands joined 
together in front of the bosom. Oxen, sheep, and 
fowls are the offerings ordinarily made to Shango, 
and, on important occasions, human beings. His 
colours are red and white. He is consulted with 
sixteen cowries, which are thrown on the ground, 
those which lie with the back uppermost being favour- 
able, and those with the back downward the reverse. 
He usually goes armed with a club called oshe, made 
of the wood of the ayan tree, which is so hard that a 
proverb says, " The ayan tree resists the axe." In 
consequence of his club being made of this wood, the 
tree is sacred to him. 

The priests and followers of Shango wear a wallet, 
emblematic of the plundering propensities of their 
lord, and the chief priest is called Magha, " The 
Receiver." As amongst the Ewe tribes, a house 
struck by lightning is at once invaded and plundered 
by the disciples of the god, and a fine imposed on the 
occupants, who, it is held, must have offended him. 
Persons who are killed by lightning may not, pro- 
perly speaking, be buried; but if the relations of the 
deceased offer a sufficient payment, the priests usually 
allow tbe corpse to lie redeemed and buried. Indi- 
viduals rendered insensible by lightning are at once 
despatched by the priests, the accident being regarded 
as proof positive that Shango requires them. A 
common idea is that Shango is subject to fretpient 
outbursts of ungovernable temper, during which 
he thumps and bangs overhead, and hurls down 

THE YORUBA-SPEAKING PEOPLES. 

stones at ttose wlio have given him cause 
offence. 

The foregoing are, with the exception of the myl 
of the fiery chains, the old ideas respecting Shango 
but on to them are now rapidly becoming graft* 
some later myths, which make Shango an earthly- 
king who afterwards became a god. This Shango 
was King of Oyo, capital of Yoruba, and became bo 
unbearable through rapacity, cruelty, and tyranny, 
that the chiefs and people at last sent him a calabash 
of parrots' egge, in accordance with the custom tbati 
has already been mentioned ; with a message that he 
must be fatigued with the cares of government, and 
that it was time for him to go to sleep. On receiving 
this intimation, Shango, instead of allowing himself to 
be quietly strangled by his wives, defied public opinion 
and endeavoured to assemble his adherents; and, when 
this failed, sought safety in flight. He left the 
palace by night, intending to endeavour to reach 
Tapa, beyond the Niger, which was his mother's 
native place ; and was accompanied only by one wife 
and one slave, the rest of his household having 
deserted him. During the night the wife repented of 
her hasty action, and also left him ; so, when in the 
morning Shango found himself lost in the midst of a 
pathless forest, he had no one with him but his slave.. 
They wandered about without food for some days,' 
seeking in vain for a path which would lead them out., 
of the forest, and at last Shango left his slave, saying, 
" Wait here till I return, and we will then try further." 
After waiting a long time, the slave, as his master did 
not appear, went in search of him, and before long- 

k 

aUEF GODS. 

found his corpse hanging by the neck from an ayan- 
tree. Eventually the slave succeeded in extricating 
himself from the forest, and finding himself in a part 
of the country he knew, made his way towards Oyo, 
where he told the news. 

When the chiefs and elders heard that Shango had 
hanged himself they were much alarmed, fearing that 
they would he held responsible for his death. They 
went, in company with the priests, to the place where 
the slave had left the body, but were unable to find 
it, for it was no longer on the tree. They searched 
in every direction, and at last found a deep pit in the 
eai'th, from which the end of an iron chain protruded. 
They stooped over the pit and listened, and could 
hear Shango talking down in the earth. They at 
once erected a small temple over the pit, and leaving 
some priests there to propitiate the new god, and 
establish a worship, returned to Oyo, where they pro- 
claimed : " Shango is not dead. Ho has become an 
oriska. He has descended into the earth, and lives 
among the dead people, with whom we have heard him 
conversing." Some of the townspeople, however, 
being ignorant and foolish, did not believe the story, 
and when the criers cried, " Shango is not dead," 
they laughed and shouted in return, " Shango is 
dead. Shango hanged himself." In consequence 
of this wicked conduct, Shango came in person, 
with a terrific thunderstorm, to punish them for 
their behaviour ; and, in order to show his power, 
he killed many of the scoffers with his fiery 
Stones, and set the town on fire. Then the 
priests and elders ran about among the burning 
E 2 

men oa^r jr: i:r'-T :::3«:ii - i -" TZ-rir i:i:}»rlief- Bfe B 

Toni' Iioiises Tirj. I115 Irr^ ^rin-rs reniLse "tco. liid not 
rindicate ois V^.^Tir."' Y-Itil t1i- "rrrtilact? fell apn 
the ^co^ers az-.: 'rear "Vm ": iT-j^rli. ^" :*.iar Siuuigo 
xa.^ appea-sei. dz-i zis .iz:r*r!T "imir-i 1^-17. Tlie place 
xhere r^'canj?:' ie^otfZ'iei jzt: riie rarrli T^ds called 
Kiiso, and >ooil ■:'ei:azie 1 :: tz. f.r oiaiiT :}€*jpLe went 
to dwell there. 

Perhaps this mvrli rfallj ires r^rfrr t-: -M^cie former 
King of Oyo, tcr-ig'':! ^^r- -i-:..--! a kiz^ sliofilii usurp 
the functions ot rze Lb."z:d»r7-i7:*:. is z-rc at all clear. 
It is inconsistent in part. ::r :: ziak-f-s rhe coiefe and 

elders alarmed at the siioidv cz >zaz^?. because thev 

• 

feared to ]?e held resrozsible f.:r Lis death : vet thev 
would have been equally respozsible ba-i he complied 
with established custom, and oonrnTrted szicide when 
he received the parrots' eeirs they sent him. The fact 
of the ayan being sacrevl to the god Shango, no doubt 
caused that tree to be selected for the leeendarv suicide 
of the king Shango ; and the iron chain which pro- 
tnided from the hole in the ground was probably 
Hijgge.sted by the notion of red-hot chains of lightning. 
As wo liave said, this myth is rapidly becoming blended 
with the older ones, and, in consequence of these events 
fiaving taken place at Kuso, Shaugo has the title of 
Oha^KuMo, " King of Kuso." 

Anofber myth makes Shango the son of Obatala, 
nrtd mnrrml to the three river goddesses Oya, Oshun, 
iind ()l>», but reigning as an earthly king at Oyo. The 
Htory n^latcft that one day Shango obtained from his 

CHIEF GODS. 

father Obatala a powerful charm, which, when eaten, 
woald enable him to vanquish all who opposed him. 
' Sliango ate most of the medicament, and then gave 
' the rest to Oya to keep for him ; but she, as soon as 
' his back was turned, ate the rest herself. Next morn- 
ing the chiefs and elders assembled at the palace as 
^ usual, to judge the affairs of the people, and each 
' spoke in his turn ; but when it came to Shaugo's turn 
* to speak, flames burst forth from his mouth, and all 
fled in terror. Oya, too, when she began to scold her 
" women in the palace, similarly belched forth flames, so 
that everybody ran away, and the palace was deserted. 
' Shango now saw that he was, as a god, inferior to 
I none; so calling his three wives to him, and taking in 
his hand a long iron-ehain, he stamped on the earth 
till it opened under him, and descended into it with 
his wives. The earth closed again over them, after 
they had gone down, but the end of the chain was left 
jjrotniding from the ground. 

This myth well exemplifies the confusion that has 
now been created in men's minds between the thunder- 
god proper and the demi-god, the result being a kind 
of compound Shango, possessing attributes of each. 
The Shango of this story resembles in his marital 
relations the thunder-god, but the descent into the 
earth with the iron chain, the end of which is left 
above ground, is like the legendary descent of the 
deified king, and is probably only another version of 
the same event. It is probable that contact with 
Mohammedans has had something to do with the 
invention of this myth. The genii, as we read of 
them in the " Ai-abian Nights," are frequently de- 
scribed as breathing forth flames to destroy their 

'L 

4. 

THE YOItUBA-SPEAICING PEOPLES. 

opponents; and a descent into the earth, which opei 
when stamped upon, is a mode of exit often found 
the same collection. These ideas do not appear 
be ones at all likely to have arisen spontaneously 
the negro mind, and we find nothing of the sort in tl 
groups cognate to the Yoruba. Moreover, a th\md( 
god must, from the very nature of his being, li' 
above the earth amongst tlio clouds ; and to make hi 
descend into the bowels of the earth, is to pi 
him in a situation where he could not exercise tl 
functions of his office. These remarks equally apply 
to the following myth. 

Since his descent into the earth with his threS 
wives at Oyo, Shango has often come back to tha 
world. One day, when down in the earth, he quar- 
relled with Oya, who had stolen some of his " medii 
cines ; " and she, terrified at his violence, ran away, 
and took refuge with her brother the Sea-Goi 
(Olokun). As soon as Shango discovered where siv 
had gone, he swore a great oath to beat her so thrt 
she would never forget it. Next morning he canrt 
up from below with the Sun, and, following him in 
his course all the day, arrived with him in the evening 
at the place where the sea and sky join, and so 
descended with him into the territories of his brother 
Olokun. The Sun had not knowingly shown Shango 
the road across the sky to Olokun's palace, for Shanj_ 
had been careful to keep behind him all the tim< 
nearly out of sight, and to hide when the Sun look* 
round. 

When Shango reached Olokun's palace and saw 
wife Oya there, he made a great noise and commotio: 

CHIEF CObH. 55 

He rushed towards her to seize her, but Olokun held 
Ilim; and while the two were struggling together Oya 
escaped, and ran to hide with her sister Olosa (the 
Lagoon). When Olokun saw that Oja had gone he 
released Shango, who, now more furious than ever, 
ran after his wife cursing and threatening her. In 
liis rage he tore up the trees bj their roots, as he 
ran along, tossing them here and there. Oya, look- 
ing out from her sister's house, saw him coming along 
the banks of the lagoon, and, knowing that Olosa 
could not protect her, I'au out again, and fled along 
the shores towards the place where the Sun goes 
down. As she was running, and Shango coming 
behind, roaring and yelling, she saw a house near at 
hand, and, rushing into it, claimed protection of a 
man whom she found there, whoso name was Huisi. 
She begged Huisi to defend lier. Huisi asked what 
he, a man, could do against Hhango ; but Oya gave 
him to eat of the " medicines " she had stolen from 
her husband, and he, being thus made an orisha-t 
promised to protect her. As Shango approached, 
Hniai ran from his house down to the banks of the 
lagoon, and tearing up a large tree by the roots, 
brandished it in the air, and defied Shango. There 
being no other tree there, Shango seized Huisi'a 
canoe, shook it like a club, and the two weapons, 
striking together, were shattered to pieces. Then 
the two 01-ishas wrestled together. Flames burst 
from their mouths, and their feet tore great fissures 
itt the earth as they dragged each other to and fro. 
This struggle lasted a long time without cither being 
able to gain the mastery, and at last Shango, filled 

5G THE YOnUIiA-SFKAKIKG PEOPF.ES. 

with fury at being baffled, and feeling his strength 
failing, stamped on tbe earth, which opened nnder him, 
and he descended into it, dragging Huisi down with 
him. At the commencement of the combat, Oya had 
fled to Lokoro ; * she remained there, and the people 
built a temple in her honour. Huisi, who had become 
a god by virtue of the "medicine" he had eaten, 
also had a teraple erected in his honour, on the spot 
where he had fought with Shango. 

In this myth Oya steals the " medicine " and gives 
it to Huisi ; in the former one she also stole it, but 
ate it herself. lu each case it caused flames to burst 
from the mouth.
